sup sach hey how's it going good man how
are you good good thanks for having me
back on my pleasure hey um thanks for
turning me on to those shoes you were to
those ultras oh nice I started running
with those yeah I like them I like them
a lot they're great uh-huh which ones
you got the Lone Peak RSM I've got the
whatever the trail ones are okay you
know I like the wide foot what's it
called foot box so check box yeah toe
box of what's called toe box yeah those
are great
cool man no I'm glad you like them and I
feel like this is what you wear so it
gets me excited you know it's really
interesting like when you dive into
under the the world of footwear and
stuff and I learned this recently and
the number one indicator of low injury
risk which is what runners always
looking for they're gonna minimize risk
so comfort is the identifier for that so
if you find yourself going into like a
specialty running shop ask them to try
on a variety of different pairs a
variety different models and find the
one that's most comfort for you and
that's probably gonna lower your risk to
the lowest you can you can get from your
Footwear anyway but if you like really
smushy ones aren't those supposed to be
not so good for you yeah no that's a
good question I think it's one of those
things where it's kind of half true half
not where you kind of have to look at
what you're what what's the purpose of
what you're doing so the way I kind of
describe it is if I'm trying to
strengthen my lower legs you know I want
that low cushion that firm platform
because that's gonna really activate the
muscles in the lower part of the leg but
if I'm dealing with some lower leg
issues or a little sore I did a workout
and my calves are kind of sore or my
ankles sore then cushion can be great
because it's gonna relieve that kind of
initial impact on the lower part of your
legs and the the caveat though is those
impact forces have to go somewhere so
they're kind of going to move further up
the kinetic chain so what I usually tell
people if you're dealing with lower leg
pain or injury then you might want to
consider something a little more
cushioned and if you want if you're
dealing with something like in your
knees or your hips then getting rid of
some of that cushion is going to just
keep that kind of more precise foot
plant and maybe alleviate some of those
impact forces from ending up in those
areas but at the end of the day the
mechanics of it all are going to be the
real driver you want your foot to come
underneath the bent knee because you're
using your legs that's kind of like a
three-foot spring essentially so if you
can get that foot plant under bent
it's gonna absorb it in the way your
body intends versus absorbing it in a
way that could maybe send those impact
forces into the wrong areas that's
really interesting you know I was
watching a video with this guy who was
in his 70s who runs in under three hour
marathon yeah and he said that five
years ago he hired a coach it was just
kind of crazy like a 65 year old dude
hiring a coach but trimmed a bunch of
time off his marathon I think more than
five minutes off of his marathon I think
it was quite a bit more than five
minutes and you know he was running for
a long time before that mm-hmm but yet a
coach sort of shortened his his time and
finishing a 26 mile race at 70 years old
yeah it's never too late yeah
the bent knee is really important
because a lot of folks who don't pay
attention to the history of Footwear
don't understand that this fat cushioned
heel that everybody sort of thinks of
when you think of a running shoe and you
when you watch a lot of people run that
don't know any better
they run and they land on their heel
which is sort of something that was
created was it by Nike is that what it
was it created that fat bottomed heel
thing yeah they I think they were the
first one to do the offset where it was
traditionally I think was like 12
millimeters where your heel would be
that much higher than your forefoot but
I think even with when we get into kind
of like say heel striking versus
forefoot or mid-foot striking heel
striking is another thing where it's not
inherently bad it all comes down to what
I was saying before where if you can
heel strike but your foot is still
underneath that bent knee you're
probably not gonna do anything too
detrimental so like that it's not
optimal right it probably depends on the
specific runner and there really a
particular gate yeah there's a good have
like extra long legs or something and
maybe heels trick would work or extra
short legs or what would it be
yeah I don't know for sure if there's
like a height thing that would do I
think would maybe just come with like
the mechanics of the way the person
learned to run in the first place and
just maybe some nuances with the way
their body is is kind of more or less
designed but I mean there's there's heel
striking folks that are very or not
injury prone or have never gotten
injuries or hardly ever get injuries but
usually I think if you're doing that
that's probably because you're under
that bent knee and you're not
kind of having that point where your
foot is out in front of your knee and
then you kind of that straight leg but
at an angle where it's gonna be you know
not not ideal for kind of absorbing
those impacts yeah that's the the real
bad one right is when people are pigeon
toed when their knees kind of Bend in
which I do see quite a bit mm-hmm that's
that's got to be terrible for your knees
right yeah I mean I couldn't say for
sure but I think I think there's a lot
of nuance and it's ends it'd be kind of
like an individual situation with a lot
of these cases so it's hard to know for
sure there's probably people who can
talk to mechanics better than me and
Haley right you just run what does the
was that explain the record you broke
you ran 24 oh in less well it was a
hundred miles and it's a 24-hour time
pair but you did it in 11 hours and 41
minutes yeah so um it was yeah let me
explain a little bit so it was a the
event itself was called six days in the
dome and really what it was was you
could do anything from a 24-hour event
to a 48-hour event to a six-day event
and just see how far you can run within
that timeframe days yeah I know there's
some crazy people out there so just wait
till David Goggins finds that event but
yeah so I've been it's interesting
because there's not a lot of time events
that are necessarily structured 400-mile
or for like 12 hours so a lot of times
you find yourself jumping into some of
these other events that are longer in
duration and just kind of using them as
a way to try to run a fast hundred mile
er or a fast 12 hour so the race
director for for that particular event
had reached out to me because he he's
known me for a while and knew that I was
targeting fast hundred mile times and
just said hey I've got this cool event
set up at the Olympic training facility
in Milwaukee Wisconsin at the Pettit
Center and I think it's gonna be pretty
conducive for fast for fast times and
and asked I wanted to do it so I
actually didn't have an ideal timeline
to that I would have normally wanted to
work with in terms of getting ready for
it but the training went really well and
I went there targeting the hundred mile
world record which was 11 hours 28
minutes and 30 seconds prior to that and
ended up running 11 hours 19 minutes and
13 seconds for
hundred miles and then since we have
like this 100 mile distance and also
this 12-hour time to event kind of
structure you can find yourself if
you're under 12 hours kind of double
dipping and getting to events for the
price of one I guess you could say so I
kept running after I hit 100 miles and
ended up going 104 point eight eight
miles total in the 12 hour time frame so
that was another record yeah those two
World Records hundred miles in 12 hours
dude six minutes and 48 seconds for a
pace for a hundred miles is fucking
bonkers that is so fast that's so crazy
that's such a fast pace man yeah you
know it's funny like when you look at it
because I think sometimes people look at
like a hundred miles in 11 hours and 19
minutes and there's not a lot of context
and they're mindless they're kind of
familiar with ultra marathon running
mm-hmm but when you start to break it
down into like the subcategories where
it's like well that's like for like sub
three-hour marathons in a row or I can't
remember how many or what the 5k time is
there's like it's like 31 five K's at
some some times for sub three-hour
marathons in a row yeah Wow so crazy
that's so fast and are you still eating
mostly meat uh so you know this gets
brought up quite a bit I think because I
mean I eat a ton of animal products for
sure but you know I wouldn't classify
myself as a quote unquote carnivore or
quite as the carnivore diet people want
to claim you we discussed this kind of
the last time you were here where you
take in a lot of glucose and you you
wrap up your carbohydrates considerably
before a race like what is what is your
what is a daily diet let's say in
training you're preparing for something
like this what's a daily diet for you
like yeah yeah so yeah let's jump into
that I think there is some nuance within
that even because when you think of my
lifestyle the way I like describe it is
if you took a calendar year and you
grabbed a single day out of there and
you grabbed a day where I was yet like a
peak training day versus a recovery day
those are like so drastically different
in terms of my energy and my my energy
demands so like things tend to fluctuate
quite a bit and change quite a bit and I
think that's oftentimes what confuses
people because they want to they look at
what I'm doing say on race day they look
at what I'm doing on one
big workout days or my rest day and
think that's what I'm doing across the
board so you and you get the folks
saying Oh Bozek follows a carnivore diet
they're probably looking at like a
post-race recovery day where then I
might be eating almost all just animal
products a lot of eggs a lot of salmon
you know red meats that sort of stuff
but if you pick a day out where I'm
doing like a big training day doing like
a 30-mile run or something like that
that's where I'm gonna kind of bring
back some of the carbohydrates to try to
supplement that activity and the best
way to maybe describe it is uh you know
there's like this this that kind of
Train low race high or this carb
periodization concept that's getting
more momentum behind it in and more
studies and science behind it too
there's some interesting folks that are
looking into this in more detail and if
folks are really interested in doing a
deep dive in it there's a guy named dr.
mark Bub's
he wrote a book called peak and he kind
of dives into kind of like some of the
nutrition science where it's been and
kind of where it's it's kind of heading
and and they highlight some of that and
one of the big things they're starting
to recognize that even with the elite
athletes when your period izing your
training like I do you know your
nutrition should be being periodized as
well you know the science is pretty
clear that like if you're doing a
workout and you take in glucose or
fructose I think most science says a two
to one ratio is ideal for maximizing the
moment you can take in then M you're
going to give yourself an advantage
that's like rocket fuel so then it
becomes a question of like do you need
that a hundred percent of the time or do
you even want to do it a hundred percent
of time because when we look at it
pause you ready yeah when you say
glucose two-to-one like what do you mean
by that and wood in the coast of
fructose okay because what they found
out is when they started doing a lot of
like the exercise science and nutrition
was that the real limiter is your gut so
like on paper so absorption yeah uh-huh
yeah there's a finite amount you can
absorb and you increase the amount you
can you can absorb on average if you
have that two to one ratio versus all of
one or the other so to glucose to one
sucrose yeah mm-hmm interesting and now
what are the different sources for
glucose versus sucrose like sucrose is
simple sugar that you get is that more
like a refined sugar yeah yeah
you I think like the way like a most
most like sports supplements and things
like that are gonna be designed to kind
of meet those those specific because
they're looking at the literature and
they're seeing like okay this is how you
got selected power8 or a Gatorade or
something like that would be a
two-to-one yeah I'd have to look to see
exactly if they have that but my guess
would be they would be if they're
looking at the research and where that's
kind of that but yeah so like really
wanna the question that I think needs to
be asked with a lot of this stuff is
like if I want to make a workout feel as
easy as possible if I'm trying if I can
get in like say 60 grams of carbohydrate
per hour it's probably gonna do that
like my pace my perceived effort at that
pace is probably going to feel easier
but then you have to ask the question
like how often do you need it to feel
that easy so for me the answer to that
is like well if I'm doing something
really strenuous or something that's in
a little bit of a gray area where it's
just fast enough to dip into the
glycogen stores but just slow enough
that I can do it for quite a while and
make maybe even a couple hours then
you're kind of in this area where that
could be an advantage for you from
performance standpoint but if I'm going
out for an easy run of like 60 to 90
minutes and it's gonna be like a 2 to 3
out of 10 perceived effort anyway like
there's no real need for me to be
hitting glucose during that or you know
sports drink during that to make that
feel even easier yet because my goal
isn't necessarily to you know make an
easy run fill even easier I guess is the
way to layer so you call a 90 minute run
easy nothing just a stroll just a few
dozen miles well and I think that that
also brings up a really good point to
where like a lot of this stuff when
we're looking at carbohydrate usage and
performance is we're looking at elite
athletes we're looking at folks that are
training for like you know the Olympics
you know sometimes they're even Olympic
medalists and that's just not a very
good comparison I think to the average
person who's out there running because
you know they're doing their purposes
are different you know their objectives
are different their lifes are very
different like one is doing basically
everything around a specific specific
date and distance and trying to run as
fast as they can on that date another
person may be trying to run as fast as
they can but there's so many other
factors in life like their work their
relationships their you know
the level of training they're actually
able to have with the time they have and
then also like you know managing their
own health and nutrition because like
you know elite athletes don't have a
very rosy picture in terms of long-term
health either so for someone who's like
you know maybe 10 20 pounds overweight
and is trying to run to get into shape
or train to get into shape or something
like that they're probably thinking just
so much about health as they are about
performance so for them to be you know
shuttling in 60 grams of carbohydrate
every hour during training and racing is
it's probably not the direction that
they'd want to go now when you get ready
to do something like this 100 mile run
how many miles do you run on a typical
day and do you ramp that up or do you
just give yourself a base and know that
you can push through like how do you
handle that yeah so I'll build up my
training the way I kind of describe it
is like I'm always focusing on
specificity kind of being Kings so
depending on the race distance and the
intensity is kind of how I'm going to
structure my workouts so the rule of
thumb that I use is the closer I get to
the workout the more specific the
workouts I do are going to be towards
that race distance and intensity so for
me what that oftentimes means since I'm
training for like a hundred mile
distance races is early in a training
black I might be doing some like shorter
interval work like vo2 max like an
example that would maybe be like a
three-minute kind of almost all out
effort followed by like a three minute
recovery jog and then another
three-minute interval like that some of
those real short interval sessions and
how many those would you do in a row how
many Sprint's versus recovery
yeah it'll depend I'll start like pretty
easy I'm the first one I did the four
when I first started I might just do
three by three on that and what my goal
really is to every week is to kind of
build volume within that so that first
week it might be just three of them but
by like say the eighth week I might do a
total of like 24 to 27 minutes worth of
volume within that vo2 max context so
it's it's it really interesting because
like you know I could go out on any one
day and do like maybe ten of those but
if I do that and then it takes me like a
week and a half to recover from that
session it's not nearly as probably
effective as if I spread that out a
little bit and said did like five by
three and then five by three three days
after that give your body chance to
recover and build versus just destroying
it all in one and then feeling like shit
for a couple weeks exactly I like to I
like to call it micro stressing when I'm
working with
folks and my own training I'm like we
want a micro stress if you want to
stress you just enough to elicit a
response and as you get stronger and
then we want to do that over and over
and over again are you where you I'm
sure you are you know who Pavel Tatsu
lanius yeah yeah so he's got that sort
of concept when it comes to
weightlifting with kettlebells in
particular calling greasing the groove
yeah whereas instead of doing all these
sets to failure you would just do like
half of what you're capable of and then
do it again in a more frequent pace like
do it again rather you know do it again
on Wednesday do it again on Friday and
then give yourself a lot of time in
between each individual activity to
particularly in training for strength he
actually recommends as much as ten
minutes of recovery in between sets
which is you know kind of correct me and
most people not all the time for that
you know six sets is an hour in I mean
it seems like you're just laying around
the gym people would if you were a gym
people in mock you but that's his
protocol mmhmm yeah yeah and I think
it's I think it you know endurance is
like a it's a patient person's game so I
think if you can build that volume in a
you know micro stressing or in a like a
sustainable way that's what's gonna keep
you or get you strong and it's also
gonna make it less likely to get injured
how much time do you need like like if
you got you know up to that insane pace
that you did when you ran 100 miles when
if you took like a week off or two weeks
off how much would you lose not much in
that amount of time especially at that
intensity so the thing is is like the
648 mile pace you we need to be kind of
relative about it so like for me when
I'm out training when I'm not when I'm
not what I'm fully recovered that's like
a pretty reasonable pace from an
intensity standpoint so the interesting
thing about ultra marathon is race pace
is sometimes faster than even some of
your easiest runs and training so your
training is kind of all what we would
call like over speed training hmm
whereas in most endurance events from
like the 1500 up to like the marathon
the majority of your work is gonna be
sub-race pace and then you're gonna have
like depending on the program you know
maybe 20-30 percent of that be like over
speed training why is that well just
because the
duration of the event is so long like
you know I can't run fast if I run too
fast then it's just gonna end badly for
me right but why is that with marathons
oh well because it's it becomes it's
similar to strength training where like
if the limiter is like the amount of
like stress you put on your body so if I
was gonna train to peak and say a
marathon my my max potential pace for
that wouldn't be sustainable to do every
run so I'd be running I'd be running too
hard too fast too often and then we'd
get into that that kind of a situation
that we're talking about before where
you're starting to macro stress versus
micro stress so if you run a marathon
what is your standard marathon pace so I
I'm a little goofy where I competed in
high school in college and then I did
some marathons but not really in a
structured manner and then I got an
ultra marathon running so I haven't
really done what I would consider a real
legitimate marathon training program so
you're basically saying marathons are
for pussies right you're saying just say
I actually think the marathon
I just think marathons are maybe the
hardest event of them all I'll explain
why because you're going fast well yeah
it's just short enough where you have to
be pushing like a fairly intense pace
but it's just long enough where if you
make a mistake you're gonna pay for that
for quite some time so you're on such a
razor's edge and you're also just one
tiny mistake away from things going
really bad and what you're saying about
mistake you're talking about pacing okay
yeah if you go out too hard yeah I see
your watch what is it what kind of watch
you wearing it's a Kouros apex what I've
never heard of that one before had a GPS
watch one of those yeah it's it's
relative they're a relatively new brand
like in in running I guess like the two
kind of big players historically have
been Suunto and Garmin mm-hmm and
korells kind of came to the market a few
years ago they wanted to try to make
like take that high-end technology but
make it maybe a little more affordable
and also make it user friendly because
now everyone's there they care more
about the post-workout or the post run
data that you're uploading to these
platforms like Strava so like corals
kind of made it a big point to make it
really user friendly on that end so you
like I get done with the run and I load
it up to the app and it's up on Strava
like within a few seconds sometimes and
then you go dissect all the data like
how much elevation
gain and loss your pace per mile oh is
this primarily a running watch I mean
you could use it for running or cycling
or hiking or mountaineering or anything
like that it's got like all those kind
of bells and whistles on okay so so if
your my question was like it so if
you're running how long you are you're
checking your watch if you're doing a
marathon you're making sure that you're
not going crazy because it's is it
otherwise you just have to kind of gauge
it just based on the pack and based on
how you feel yeah and I think that's
actually a good especially when you get
into ultra marathon I think the metric
that people should dial in the most is
their rate of perceived exertion because
that's something that's not gonna
necessarily lie to you like if you base
your thing your stuff off heart rate
exclusively or a pace exclusively you
can find yourself like justifying
something that's not necessarily where
you need to be and if something like
that malfunctions and that was your like
only compass then you're in trouble so I
like when I'm doing my training and when
I'm working with other folks I like to
use heart rate and I like to use pacing
and stuff like that but ultimately I'm
trying to get the person to really
understand like how hard is this effort
and then across the board from like very
easy to very difficult and then when it
comes time to race we can kind of dial
in like this is the intensity you're
trying to look for so that they can kind
of feel that out to use a metric like to
you say like how do you feel seven to
ten yeah pretty much
I'll have a scale of like one to ten
that I'll use a lot of times and there's
like a whole variety like most people
are gonna be using some sort of like
probably like zone system of training
where there's like there's numbers that
are associated with heart rate ranges or
intensities and there will be
descriptors and you know there's some
that are like 1 through 20 there's some
that are kind of 1 through 5 and then 1
through 10 and isn't that so so weird
too right because it's so it's
subjective I mean the whoop-whoop strap
is something I wear and it uses
something like that like what's your
perceived exertion of my own I just push
it towards the far right I don't know
like what does that mean like it's it's
also hard to gauge your perceived
exertion especially when the workouts
over yeah I was hard I went on went all
out like what does that mean I don't
know what that means
you know yeah yeah it can be tricky and
it is very subjective but I think it's
one of those things where it falls into
the same category that a lot of
endurance events are where you just got
to be patient and
really work on kind of understanding
that and you learn from experience to
like you you find out like oh I went and
did this workout and I thought that was
the right pace and intensity that turned
out to be a little too fast duty keep a
training log yeah mm-hm and do you like
write it on Excel or something like that
yeah I basically just load all my stuff
up to Strava and then yeah so that's
kind of like the go-to for most runners
these days is I'm sorry but do you keep
like a diary like today felt like this
and this was an issue and I felt like I
didn't have enough fluids or do you do
anything like that not so much anymore I
did it a lot when I was in college and I
did it a lot when I first started when I
was really trying to kind of learn my
body and kind of learn what things mean
and and how I respond to them but now
I've been kind of doing it long enough
where I have enough of a like an
understanding of kind of how like when
things go wrong like why they did or if
something went really well like why it
did that
I don't feel like I need to take as
detailed notes but I think it's really
valuable for someone who's especially
well they're trying to learn the rate of
perceived exertion and kind of really
dial those things in it's probably worth
a lot of worth a lot worth their time to
write that stuff down so that they can
look back at it and they have that
resource available to them as they're
kind of reflecting on things now say if
you're getting ready to do something
like this crazy 100 mile run trying to
break a world record what what do you
would help much time you giving yourself
to really truly prepare for that is it
based on what how you're at right now
like what your baseline is like what
kind of preparation you've done before
you knew that this race was available to
you like how do you do that mm-hmm yeah
no and this is this little we can kind
of hop back to where we're talking about
before because when I was talking about
the vo2 max work know stuff that's kind
of early in my training plan because
that intensity is very unspecific to a
hundred mile you pace you know that's
you know those vo2 max workouts are much
closer to something shorter like a 5k so
what are you trying to do with those of
you - max workouts you just trying to
elevate your your base yeah like just in
like a hear that like there's the
different systems of training and that's
kind of a higher intensity system so
it's not very relevant to the race pace
that I'm doing specifically but it's not
irrelevant to my overall like aerobic
efficiency so like by doing some of
those faster stuff things you
work on things like your form and just
because when you're running that fast
like things tend to be a little more
dialed in and it just it expands it
basically what you do is you give
yourself kind of a bigger range of what
your potential is gonna be when you
start focusing more and on like the
aerobic side of things that we're gonna
see like as I would move further down in
the training plan so once I kind of do
that section of training to answer your
question they're like ideally I'll have
maybe about since I'm coming into most
programs not completely out of shape
like four months is kind of a sweet spot
for me if I was coming like off the
couch so to speak six months would be a
little more appropriate are you ever off
the couch only if I'm injured and I've
only been injured in any significant way
since ultra since they're altering
running once for about five weeks seven
I had a stress fracture on my right
sacral ax
it's kind it's basically like on your
tailbone oh ouch yeah yeah the fuck
happened so what I think I don't know
it's hard to know for sure but what was
the way was described to me when I was
going in and getting eye stuff checked
out was what likely happened was I had
such a history and kind of flat running
that I was actually preparing for a race
had a lot more climbing descending so I
started changing my training to more
climbing and ascending and when I did
that like one thing that sometimes
happens when you're running a lot of
flat hard surfaces is you're like ankles
and your hips can get pretty tight from
that real like kind of uniform like
mechanic's that you're doing so like my
range of motion was semi limited so when
I was doing some of that hard downhill
and uphill running I just probably
wasn't very efficient with my form and
it ended up the kind of were talking
before those impact forces ended up in
the wrong spot and then the stress
fracture occurred that is crazy you
broke your ass you literally broke your
ass yeah people always talk about all he
was busting his ass like you actually
did so where is it Jamie right there oh
Jesus Christ it's so it's it literally
is your ass bone you a really goofy
thing about it too was Wow when I first
had the pain surface for that it was
kind of in like the like lower back
glute area is where it surfaced so I
thought I had like a sciatic issue like
I went into the doctor and they were
like okay let's try some like actives
release therapy and let's see if we can
get this thing to loosen up and we just
were working on
working on it and like it would like
clear up where I wouldn't notice it if I
was walking around but then every time
I'd go for a run or try to go for a run
I get that sharp pain right away and so
after about I think it was maybe four
weeks or so we just we had been doing a
ton of Active Release a ton of mobility
work and then like it wasn't going away
so he's like well let's just get an MRI
and see what's going on in there and
they did the MRI got the results back
and he said there's nothing there so you
start running again so I started running
again I ran like I think it was two or
three days maybe very short like two
miles and then three miles then maybe
five or something like that and then I
got a call back from the doctor and he's
like well it turns out we took a second
look at the MRI there is a stress
fracture I told him like well I just ran
the first three pain-free days I ever I
have since this this issue nine fuck
yeah well and I think what he said maybe
was going on there was it was I mean it
was a very fine stress fracture it
wasn't
I mean sometimes when people have a
fracture on their sacred Ala it's like a
big enough fracture where like it can be
out for like a year and oh yeah yeah so
it can be a really bad injury but he
said maybe the mobility and the strength
work I was doing while I had that to try
to rehab kind of strengthen the areas
around it enough that when I just was
running flat really slow really easy
that protected that area enough where I
didn't feel the pain anymore so after
that I think I took another like two
weeks off completely just to make sure
before I started building back up and
then I started kind of building back up
again do you ever run on one of those
err runner things you know those
self-propelling treadmills I've been on
one once before but not in any like a
significant way they look pretty sweet I
love those damn things which one do we
have what is it uh who makes it it's
aired I'm right airdyne makes it the air
runner is that what it's called
Jamie I'll find out but anyway man it's
some percentage thirteen or make up the
number 13 percent harder than actual air
assault
air runner yeah it's amazing it's hard
as fuck I gave one to Bert Bert
Kreischer losers too hard because he
likes using a treadmill and pretending
he's really running when he's just
picking his legs up and down you know
but that makes you actually push and see
your calves get blown the fuck up man
it's
it's hard yes it's really good and it's
what does it say and what is its what
percentage does it say it's harder than
actual running like if you were just
running at the same pace some people are
like runnings hard enough why are we
making it harder but the idea is that
you go and run and mix running easier
uh-huh yeah sort of like running with
weights on uh-huh but it doesn't give
you an additional stress yes not too
good it's not pounding on your body
mm-hmm you know it's not like you're
you're doing anything that's gonna
injure you but it's it's caught you you
know you have to propel that thing you
know it's if folks don't know what we're
talking about it's basically a very
subtle you right like the way the thing
is structured and it's got tread on it
and as you run you are the thing that's
making it move so there's no machine or
it's not plugged in it's not like it's
electronic and you set the pace and you
just gotta keep up with it it's not it's
you're making it run uh-huh so you're
pushing it and as you push it it
requires extra energy and extra effort
in that extra effort when you actually
go run on a regular road surface or a
trail it seems easier mm-hmm yeah I know
that makes sense and I think it's pretty
cool because like yeah with the weighted
stuff like you run the risk essentially
hurt something bad additional weight
like they were doing these rock
challenges I forget to come I think it
was trained to hunt or one at one of
these one of these competitions they
were making people wear heavy packs it
might not have been trained to hunt it
was much I think it was another cunt but
anyway they would make you wear like a
hundred pound pack and so the idea was
they were doing these races with a
hundred pound packs on which you can
imagine is a fucking recipe for
orthopedic surgeon races yeah and so
these people were getting kind of jacked
up and they Steve they stopped doing
that as a competent you know as a
running competition but there's a few of
those similar kind of competitions where
they force you to do a bunch of physical
activities and then bring your heart
rate down and execute shots on targets
and then run to the next station and do
a bunch of physical activities and they
were doing that with heavy heavy weights
on and just really was a bad idea
mm-hmm yeah yeah I think that would that
would be maybe good for if you're gonna
do like a mountain
hearing experience and you got to carry
a bunch of old stuff like you're doing
with the hunting but even then you
really should just ruck
yes pet the heavy pack on there's a
company called outdoorsman's it makes a
really good one it's called an atlas
pack and it's essentially a pack frame
but the back of it is a universal post
like would you would use for weights you
know like a weightlifting post for you
know Olympic weights you know so those
big round steel plates slide right onto
it so you can get a 45-pound plate on it
and then clamp it down and so it's like
really secure on you as opposed to like
sometimes if you put too much weight in
a pack like maybe it'll sit all at the
bottom it's this is like boom right the
center of your back and you cramp it
down and and then you know you're really
carrying all that weight you know on
your hips a little bit on your shoulders
it's all like really centered well
that's a good one for really training
but you don't fucking run with it you
just hike hike yeah that's our yeah hard
enough just to walk with it does it say
how much Representatives it's no I
couldn't find like an official testing
of whatever but one person that did a
big deep dive into it said its main
thing was to fix his gait or a will
improve running gait mmm that 30% is a
number that they read is like a sales
like thing 30 I didn't hear that one I
thought I couldn't find it was like a
I'm trying to find like testing or some
it doesn't seem like it's 30 percent
mathematician but it's it's just
excellent for training do you do any
training on machines or is all your
training essentially done on the road
the running is all pretty much done on
the road in the trails I'll do like some
mobility work and some strength work on
the gym and that's where I'll I'll kind
of go inside I guess for it but yeah you
know I I've used treadmills and stuff in
the past and I do use them from time to
time but usually if I have the option to
go outside I'll do that and I mean I
live in Phoenix so it's you know we're
it's sunny Coles days 7d yeah exam there
this weekend actually oh yeah that's
right you're at the is it chimeric
america's next
yeah Friday and Saturday I'm psyched
yeah I love Phoenix yeah it's the time
of year to be there for sure yeah man
right what's what's the temperature
there right now probably maybe 65
I ever saw I've been there before in the
summer in July when he at Tempe improv
and it was like fucking 120 uh-huh well
and that's that's the funny thing too
cuz when I was training for that 100
mile 12-hour world record it was through
the summer because the race was in
August so my training was like 110
degrees some days and the funny thing
too is the Petitte Center where I did
the race it was actually built for speed
skating and some hockey rinks so they
keep it at like 60 degrees nevermind I
remember one day when I was running it
was like one of the hottest days this
summer I'm are thinking like I'm gonna
race literally at half this temperature
yeah so it's really funny when you when
you see when you see that and I think
I'm I'm no expert at it by any means but
I think there's some pretty cool like
studies and stuff that of the effects
that happen when you are training in
some of those extreme heats like what
happens it for the way was described to
me is it kind of simulates training at
altitude to a degree hmm
so who knows maybe that makes sense well
it's similar to hot yoga right mm-hmm
that's they're doing some studies at
Harvard I believe I think it's Harvard
someone was explaining the whole deal to
me there's not something that I read but
essentially what they're doing is
they're trying to find out whether or
not hot yoga these 90-minute hot yoga
sessions replicates some of the known
benefits of sauna uh-huh because you
know obviously the temperature is not as
hot they keep it the hot yoga place I go
to I think they keep it at 105 degrees
versus sauna you know it gets much much
hotter than that you're in like the 180s
which what I like and but the idea is
that when your body is extremely
stressed when you're doing these poses
and you're sweating like crazy that your
body core temperature rises basically to
similar level then if you're just
sitting in a sauna so you get a very
similar response yeah yeah it's it's
really interesting so I try to remember
that when it's the summer in Phoenix so
I don't get to miss yeah it's got you
got to be doing yourself good crock gym
which is one of the most famous boxing
gyms in history a Manuel Stewart who was
a just a wizard of boxing and he trained
Tommy Hearns and you know some of the
like to all-time greats of that era he
would crank the temperature and this is
in Detroit they would crank the
temperature up really hot
you'd go into that gym and it would be
that way like for that specific reason
because he believed that it increased
endurance mm-hmm yeah it's it's
interesting stuff but I'll still take
January and February for comfort now
what do you do in terms of like how do
you hydrate yourself and like what what
kind of durations are we talking about
like Savior if it's 110 degrees outside
120 with it was the hottest you ran out
I think 110 is what I do and I try to
get out relatively early so that it's
not like 110 from start to finish so
like if I get out say at like 6:00 or
7:00 in the morning you know it might be
in the 80s high 80s and be working its
way up so that like I'm finishing and it
might be 1:10 for Mikey workouts the way
I structure my training usually when I'm
kind of in peak is I'll do them my
biggest workout in the morning and then
I might go out and do like a second run
that's like a little shorter or quite a
bit shorter in most cases and really low
intensity and you know then sometimes if
it's the afternoon in Phoenix that's
when I would see like that 1:10 but I'm
usually not out for more than like 45 60
minutes for those so hydrating is is
interesting because you know I grew up
in the Midwest so I was very familiar
with running in hot humid stuff in the
summer and you know the dry desert heat
though it seems like you get thirsty a
lot quicker and a lot more frequently so
I you know one of the things I learned
the first summer I was in Phoenix was
knowing where the water fountains are
and kind of planning your house around
that you drink out of public water
fountains when I have to you worry about
cooties I haven't gotten anything too
miserable yeah in fact I did a race
earlier this year it was in early June
called the San Diego hundred and it's
got this spot in the middle of the
course where the aid stations are a
little further apart there's like a nine
mile stretch in a seven mile stretch and
I kind of miss timed how much water I
did so I filled up my water and a stream
and it was probably not an ideal oh dude
but I rolled the dice and it just I
don't get no I'm getting pad no I'm I
thought during the race was this is the
mindset in the middle of one of these
things is like well if something really
bad happens will happen after the race
so I definitely would but it's really
bad yeah already is rough I've never had
it but the people that I know that have
had it say it's really bad but you know
you could just bring a SteriPEN you
but you can't really stop huh yeah I
mean in a race I wouldn't want to yeah
and what what really helped for me was
the the situation is since the track
rate since the race was on an indoor
track 400 and like I think 42 and some
odd meters I was doing a lot of my big
long runs on a 400 meter track okay so
when I did that I would just bring out
like a cooler I don't have ice and water
in there I would sit there waiting for
you oh that's sweet yeah that makes
sense but when you do a lot of trail
running though right I do some of that
too yeah
historically I've done a lot more flat
runnable stuff but now that I'm out in
Phoenix I like to try to split the year
into two halves and do some trail stuff
in half the year and some like flat or
rogue or track or runnable stuff in the
second half do you bring water when you
run trails do you bring like a backpack
or something like that like one of those
um you know what Zack yeah yeah with the
tubes
yeah but the fuck is that camels camel
camel backs
yeah there's I'll do I don't usually use
what they call like the bladder which is
the tube thing that you're talking nice
though they are and you can pack a lot
of water yeah usually unless I unless
I'm gonna be away from a potential stop
long enough usually what I'll do is I'll
I'll use the pack but I'll have like
small or a little like like little
flasks soft lacks in there okay so you
bring those two that you even like on
the the chest straps yeah a lot of
people with those but you're rolling the
dice with that like you got to know how
much to sip yeah you know we're lady the
pickup spots are from or run with
friends yeah when I run with my dog in
the summer when it gets really hot I
bring a hydro flask in a backpack and
I'm one of those collapsible dog bowls
because you know I don't want him
drinking out of puddles and so but that
just having that extra couple pounds on
your back it makes a difference you can
you feel it yeah yeah and that's that's
why part of the reason why I try to go
as minimal as I can with water if I if I
can get away with it obviously if I go
out and do like a big loop where there's
no potential stops I'm gonna have to
carry it all from the beginning but if
it's a spot where I know like I can get
to water every five six seven miles then
usual I'll pack a little lighter and not
be carrying as much at any one given
time do you hydrate up before you go
yeah I mean I think that's the one's one
of the
things to really get right in Phoenix
was just like kind of learning kind of
how much you need to be hydrating like
between sessions because what I usually
found out is I could go out and kind of
neglect hydration for anyone given like
run or workout but if I did that then
the next one I'd probably pay for it so
for me the big motivation to make sure
I'm on top a hydration during any given
run is because I know like if I don't
then the next one's gonna potentially be
man I've done that before that's that's
a weird feeling trying to do anything
when you're dehydrated it's like you
have a bad battery or something yeah
it's like everything's like oh come on
it's it's it's amazing how just normal
everyday life like you could feel like a
little run down you barely notice it but
once you start physically exerting once
you start training once you start doing
something hard that's when you become
like really in tune with how you're
screwing your body up like drinking for
instance mm-hmm like have a couple of
drinks and then run like oh god you're
like well this is what it's doing to my
body yeah I got a fucking stop drinking
you know yeah yeah I think you you I
like drinking to thirst that's use you
but my gauge is and I haven't really had
any issues with it with that with that
so there's no like strategy like say I'm
gonna run 25 miles today let me drink X
amount of liters of water before I go
out
no before the run ya know I try not to
like do too much like kind of like
pre-emptive hydrating because I think
what you want what people oftentimes I
think do then is they drink too much and
then that comes out of the expense of
your electrolytes too because your
body's gonna screech those so if I'm if
I find myself
couldn't you just supplement you can
yeah and I'll do a lot more of that
especially in the heat too just in
general is like having like electrolyte
supplementation and things like what do
you use for your electrolytes
supplementation I use a product called
hydro ax mostly it's a like a powder
that you can kind of mix in with your
water by a company named X endurance
they have they make these little tubes
now to wear like so if I'm running and I
have like one bottle with some in it
already I can have these little like
just these little tubes that if I've
refill and want to put more and I can
just kind of take them all pop it off
and and pour that in
a lot of other people will use you can
make like little caps that you just
swallow it with your water and it's got
like the formulation of the different
electrolytes in there kind of dialed in
and you know that's a and I think that's
a little more hit or miss as to like
like where people feel you need that
some people tell you don't really need
electrolytes at all just need to salt
your foods and things like that all the
way to like you should be taking X
number of these every hour there's got
to be science behind it right I mean do
you are you getting blood tests and
finding out what your levels are pre and
post workouts or anything along those
lines yeah I haven't done any like post
workout tests to say other than I know I
was part of the faster study which was a
study that looked at high carb and high
fat athletes and I think they were
looking at some of that stuff too and
like anytime I've ever had a blood test
done though by like my my electrolytes
like my sodium potassium levels always
been in range so I haven't really tried
to it's one of those things then where
it's like I'm probably not gonna try to
fix something that's not broken Ryan
you're pretty diligent about your
supplementation yeah I mean I I I
definitely am not afraid to salt my food
you know most my food is conducive to
putting salt on so you know I'm probably
getting quite a bit of that stuff just
in my day of day-to-day nutrition - do
you have a specific salt that you like
to use Himalayan do you see Saul like
what do you like to use yeah I like to
get sea salt lately I've been using uh
this stuff called Redmon's sea salt they
they get their salt at alike
I believe it's in Utah in Salt Lake okay
and I don't know like if the how
accurate or whatever this is but like
they I heard that if you can get an
inland sea salt it's better because it's
not like it doesn't have potential as
many potential toxins that you can find
in like oceans yeah yeah that's what the
idea about Himalayan sea salt is right
because it's no real fucking sea in the
Himalaya yeah is it called Himalayan sea
salt or am I just making that up or is
it Himalayan salt
I think it's sea salt right yeah the
pink Himalayan sea salt right yeah but
how was it
sea salt explained that how does that
work was it an older sea I wonder what
it is and it's similar it's just like
these big salt oh it is just salt okay
oh it's just Himalayan salt No
oh yeah I think I've heard it like an
old C that's no longer there and they
just have the big salt deposits right
like that's what a lot of Montana is the
Great Western in inland sea you know
like millions of years ago like they
find seashells in Montana yeah she was
just fucking bonkers yeah it's crazy uh
I was I was in Utah earlier in the year
a camera where we were just out of Salt
Lake and apparently that used to be on
underwater too and like they'll find
like shark teeth and stuff like that
around there like Anna's you're up on
this like trail and they're like there's
no water and say think about that next
time you see some asshole that would
spend ten million dollars on a house on
the beach yeah okay pay for that event
yeah that it's not gonna be here
something's gonna be different in the
future it's always been that way like
there's no permanent like place where
the water is or the water isn't yeah it
is funny how we think of that though
it's like we see the map now and we're
like oh okay this is just how it is
yeah maybe not well look at Pangaea yeah
you know things change pretty goddamn
radically what's up Jamie I don't know
the accuracy of this but I just found
this okay Himalayan sea salt is a
gourmet salt with a slightly misleading
name it doesn't come from the Himalayan
mountains oh Jesus and it doesn't come
from a sea these motherfuckers it's
definitely a seesaw so it's not a total
misnomer Himalayan salt actually refers
to exclusively to Pakistani rock salt no
they used to be sea salt hundreds of
millions of years ago so why don't we
call it Pakistan if I was Pakistani I'd
be mass yeah look at these motherfuckers
are stealing our shine when a sea
spreading over the region dried up it
was covered by geological shifts leaving
massive deposits of salts scattered
throughout the hills odd name aside
Himalayan salt has a lot going for it
it's tasty it's pink and some even claim
it has healing properties assholes those
are the people that like crystals yeah
that's what we have a big Himalayan salt
rock right there yeah we'll and lo I'll
just go look at look at that sucker has
anybody looked at yet someone must've
licked it when were looking at yeah I
like Himalayan salt oh it's it it does
it's nice but like
cooking like we're cooking mean
particularly I like kosher salt because
you've got the big big flakes flakes
yeah
what's the when you put the big flakes
on there's that help like retain the
moisture on it or allegedly I don't know
you know I cook in a Trager which I
defined that the low heat and the the
what I do is I cook at about 225 degrees
and they have a setting called super
smoke so it sort of accentuates the
smoke you know what a traitor's yeah
yeah for folks who don't know it's it's
a pellet grill and what pellet grills
are they they use something like this
table like when they make this table
this is hardwood this is made out of oak
they would saw the the tree and the
sawdust in the past we just sort of
throw out well then they figured out
where you can compress that sawdust and
turned it into these pellets using the
natural sugars from the wood so there's
no chemicals at all and there's a lot of
like really good ones but you know the
one that I use as a trigger and when
they compress these pellets there's a
heating element that's electrically
fired inside the the grill that heating
element turns into flame in turn it
cooks the pellets and turns it into fire
so it's just fire and wood it's really
pure so you're just basically cooking
over wood and it's you can perfectly
regulate the temperature and you do it
on your app and all that stuff but
because it's so well insulated and I
cook most what I cook is wild game which
is very low in fat mm-hmm so you really
can't you really shouldn't cook at high
heat or for any long period of time you
got them you got to make sure you
monitor the temperature of the actual
food itself so I like to put it in there
and I get it up to about a hundred and
twenty five hundred and thirty degrees
then I sear it on a cast-iron frying pan
usually in beef tallow beef day yeah the
best for that so I get some more extra
fats healthy fats with that I've been
doing a lot of slow cooking lately I'll
go in phases where I'll be drilling I
got to get a palette girl with all those
things look pretty sweet I'll hook up
I'll hook you up
I'll have triggers anyone Oh awesome
happy great dude they're living once you
use one it's like I have a regular grill
it's just fucking gathering dust yeah I
don't even touch it anymore cuz it's you
could do everything on this thing and
it's so easy to maintain the exact
perfect
temperature and again for game like I'm
not cooking at a high I'm not worried as
much about losing moisture so it's
mostly a flavor thing I really just love
the flavor of like the salty on the
outside and then especially when it's
seared you know it's just nice yeah yeah
you know I I think like that the low and
slow is the way to go for a lot of that
stuff and yeah when I do a when I roast
uh I'll get like a roast I'll put it in
a slow cooker and ultimately some of the
fat will separate and kind of form on
the top and always take that off and use
it cook eggs and stuff later so it's ooh
that's nice yeah yeah a lot of people
have their own idea about what to do and
what not to do but I I learned this from
a guy named Chad Ward his uh label on
Instagram is whiskey bent BBQ oh yeah
and he's a world champion pitmaster this
fucking guy can cook his ass oh my god
he's cooked for us a few times in in
hunting camps and his food is insane
he's so good and that's his philosophy
is the reverse sear meth is where I
learned it from I learned it from him a
lot of times people will cook it they're
sear it on the outside and then they try
to finish it off and you can do that
that way but it's not as good it's
better to bring it up to temperature
slowly inside like a pellet grill
another good method is Susie do you ever
sous-vide things I I haven't yet I've
had it from restaurants before though
yeah I was talking to someone they said
a lot of restaurants now do that just so
they can kind of make their all their
stuff more uniform so ya go and you get
exactly what you did the last time yeah
they don't no one fucks up because if
you go you know you can go to restaurant
order medium-rare and it comes out well
right yeah
I've had that happen right but the
sous-vide method is fantastic too
because say if you have a steak and you
want that steak to be a hundred and
thirty-five degrees you basically put
the the the setting at 135 degrees you
can put it in there for four hours
mm-hmm so when you get it it's just all
the tendons and ligaments and all that
stuff is just broken down all the fash
is broken down and it's just so tender
but it feels weird because you're
boiling in a fucking plastic bag that
seems so wrong it's like you're not I
mean I know it's a different kind of
plastic but you're not even supposed to
drink water if you're lastic yeah if
your plastic
bottles been sitting in a hot car mm-hmm
it's like how the fuck can you
apparently you can that's not an issue
at all you know to cook in it
you know but it makes me feel weird if
eventually we'll here in five years that
that's going to give us cancers I don't
know man I don't think so
what is the reason why they can okay
here we're going down a rabbit hole oh
let's try let's go down the Suvi rabbit
hole why is it okay to Suvi your food
and why doesn't it leak
what is it BC peas is that what they're
worried about BCA's bps just a bunch of
B and a bunch of other letters which is
supposed to be what you get this isn't
some NASA scientists have figured it out
all right maybe not maybe the same guy
who said smoking is fine you know
doctors prefer camel yeah and you know I
don't think we're dealing with that but
it just it feels weird but it for as far
as flavor it's a phenomenal way to cook
a particularly wild game it's really
good for because again you don't
overcook it like if you want to cook an
elk steak to 130 degrees and then
blowtorch the outside that's what a lot
of people do mm-hmm
you know that's how you finish on a su V
you basically use a fucking blowtorch
uh-huh oh so I have this I guess it's
like the Elon Musk flamethrower in the
background I literally could use that
yeah because it's basically the same
thing it's just a fucking torch and you
torch the outside of it to get a nice
you know caramelized crust and then the
inside you know it's perfect super
tender
yeah what does it say Jamie you don't
like it does it say it's gonna kill you
the first one just says like there's
after consider amount of research that's
been done we believe the answer is it's
safe and it's like they believe it is a
little window well I feel like if you
know cooking it every day like when the
director of The Cove was in here I
always fucking have a hard time saying
is less Soho yes
so hey Louie Psihoyos was in here he was
explaining how he was eating a lot of
fish before I became a vegan he he was
eating a ton of fish and his mercury
levels it really shot out
because a lot of fish that's like a lot
of fucking mercury and if you eat fish
for morning noon and night every day day
after day after day you can develop high
mercury mercury levels but then I talked
to other scientists they said yes if
you're eating it every day all day but
if you just eat it fish like once a week
you're fine like don't worry about it or
even twice a week so I was like oh did
they say anything cuz I remember like
when I think was probably when the
Mediterranean diet got popular people
were all in on salmon and stuff and
seafood and then it's everyone
wild-caught yeah and I guess that's
where you'd get the mercury but then
they would say like the farm-raised
salmon are not as good for you for
whatever reason but then I guess now
farm-raised is what you're supposed to
get because that's gonna there can
control that environment and make sure I
heard with Louise saying those that it's
even worse oh really
yeah in terms of like the heavy metals
and targets got to think they're just
sitting there yeah like it's like at
least in the ocean they're they're
migrating they're moving around they're
swimming in different places like that
that podcast that I did with him was so
disturbing because I've always had this
weird not weird just this sort of
peripheral fear of what we're doing to
the ocean you know this like thing like
man whoa how many assholes are out there
just giant Nets just pulling fish out of
the ocean right now as we speak and how
how much is that sustainable yeah and I
think individual people fishing is
sustainable right that's not what's
going on it's just huge Nets they're
just scooping up everything and the the
conversation that I had with him scared
the shit out of me for the future of the
ocean because what was what's been done
the amount of damage has been done over
a hundred years it's very similar to the
amount of damage that was done sort of
at the end of the the end of the 18th
century the beginning of the 19th
century in the United States worth
market hunters it basically wiped out
almost every animal wiped out the
Buffalo do you know when they were
shooting the Buffalo they were basically
shooting him further hides and their
tongues and they would leave the
carcasses to rot yeah which is just
insane we think about bison today is
like one of the most cherished meats
right because it's so delicious and so
good for it high in protein and taste
great yeah
but we basically almost wiped out every
animal on this entire continent until
they stepped in and decided to start
regulating hunting and stopping it and
then sort of made concerted efforts to
reintroduce animals and still most of
them are not if they're historic range
yeah yeah no it's uh you know it gets
interesting you start looking into some
of that stuff but uh hopefully they get
the the bison herd back to where they
need to well they kind of have that I
mean there's there's basically a healthy
supply of bison but not the ocean well
the thing is like the same thing that we
did not wait you and I weren't a lot but
the human beings did in North America
they're doing right now the world is
doing to the ocean yeah and there's no
real concerted effort to reintroduce
these animals or surficial sure I see
what you're saying yeah so we're
essentially not learning from our past
mistakes well yeah we're just and it's
also there's too many people involved
the thing about the ocean is it's kind
of unregulated right right yeah whose is
it it's the Wild West out there it's
just this big gigantic swath of its it's
basically like another world that's
connected to our world you know it's a
water world we have the land world and
the land monsters going to the water
world with these floating little fucking
killing machines and suck all the living
forces and living beings out of the
water world and then serve it up on rice
sushi ah
I mean healthy you know it's just it's
weird are you still doing you you were
doing a podcast with dr. Shaun Baker
right yeah yeah it's a human performance
outliers podcast we've been and I think
we've got maybe 175 episodes now so
we've been also you guys are still a
hall at it yeah yeah we're not we we had
a stretch where we're doing about three
a week but we've kind of backed off a
little bit of that we're just scheduling
and stuff this how do you do it do you
do it over the phone yeah that's always
the hardest part where is he he's he saw
down in in Southern California okay
you're in FINA onna and so do you have
guests and do that over the phone yeah
we'll bring them in and we'll record
with exhume video recording and then
bring it up but that's always the
hardest part is getting the audio
quality for that it's awkward too right
yeah I really
I've only done over the last few years I
did the Snowden interview which I did
remotely and I did one with dr. Anthony
West who's an Egyptologist I did it with
him but most most of the time when you
do it with the with Skype or anything
along those lines it's like you're kind
of talking over each other this is weird
delay it feels inorganic uh-huh yeah
in-person is the way to go you know if
you can do it so props to you well I
just I just don't I mean I just don't I
don't like it it feels I feel I don't
feel connected mmm all right it feels
awkward yeah it doesn't doesn't make a
good product I don't think as good a
product no for sure yeah you're taking a
step back if you do remote for sure so
yeah but it's been it's been a cool
experience just from a learning
standpoint I mean we I don't think we
really have a specific direction I mean
Shawn's Shawn's kind of the guy that
everyone let's do it from the carnivore
things so I think sometimes we get
identified as carnivore but we
definitely go down at a bunch of
different rabbit holes like we did um
we've had a lot of like some of the
protein researchers come on and talk
about some of that stuff like dr. Stu
Phillips or professors do Phillips
professor down Lehman professor
hose-down told me you mean about
proteins toughly different qualities of
protein yeah they're doing like the
protein research they're kind of the
guys who are on the doing some of the
more recent research and looking at like
well what are our protein needs for I
across like a variety of Ages as well as
when you introduce athletics and then
like what does the quality verses or
like I guess maybe the best way to look
at is like the bioavailability of
different protein sources and things
like that and I think there's a you it
seems like something that we we'd have
figured out already but there's I guess
some nuance with that even and now we're
they're saying that there's probably
reason to believe that our our
recommendations should be higher than
what they have been historically
especially for athletes and elderly
folks and but you mean the RDA yeah yeah
the RDA as it currently stands is
basically just to prevent disease right
mm-hmm yeah something like that and I
think they're I think they maybe are
learning more too about just kind of
what role protein plays in bone health -
as opposed to just because people think
of protein as just this building block
for muscle but there's a lot that goes
into it with
with bone bone health as well so those
guys that were really interesting to
hear hear about and we've done a lot of
stuff with ranchers and some of the like
the savory salads and folks come on the
show and talk about kind of that
practice versus kind of your standard
agricultural production math dates and
things like that savory sound you mean
Joel Salatin what itwhat is savory like
Allan savory Sookie that Allan savory
Joel Salatin will Harris from white oak
pastures on Bobby Gill he's part of the
savory Institute's
come on I just kind of share with us
like kind of where that stuff is axe I
think there's a lot of guesswork and
unanswerable questions at this point
with with that some of that stuff
because we're projecting like you know
way down the road with some of this
stuff are you talking about the
difference between grain-fed versus
grass-fed meat yeah and most
specifically with those guys to just
like kind of what it's doing to the soil
health in the soil quality mm-hmm so one
thing that I've learned that was
interesting was that I mean we kind of
start to like throw a lot of these
different like quote unquote
regenerative type regenerative type
practices into one bucket or one
category when in reality there's a lot
of different variants within them so
someone can say like Oh regenerative
agriculture is gonna save the planet and
then someone will go dig up a bunch of
studies that show like well no it
actually doesn't do anything and then
like yeah I'm confusing that because
Chris crecer is all in on this
regenerative agricultural thing but it
has there it's a real evidence that you
can have a zero carbon gain yeah I mean
it's that's the that's the the the net
positive the idea is that if you use
regenerative agriculture meaning the
animals graze there there's you're not
talking to mono crop environments that
these cows graze on open fields of grass
and then they shit all over the place
and then you know that that shit becomes
manure and that this actually helps the
plant life grow and all this stuff sort
of it all becomes a part of a cycle you
had this regenerative practice is
actually instead of raising the carbon
footprint it actually makes a carbon
neutral footprint yeah yeah and I think
where sometimes it gets confusing is if
you go and you just look at
Studies on regenerative agriculture you
get a lot of mixed information so what I
was told and I'm still kind of going
down this rabbit hole and the way I like
to look at all these type of things is I
try to like look at one side of the
story
and then look to the other side and see
where the counters are to that and just
kind of go back and forth until you hit
a dead end and then you know if you hit
a dead end like that's where you're at
for now until you've something else gets
introduced and where I got to now is
okay I think of as maybe we'll Harris
told us this that when you're looking
for these studies on kind of what
practice is gonna be good in terms of
like soil regeneration you have to look
up adaptive multi paddock grazing
because if you look up like holistic or
regenerative agriculture you're going to
get a whole mess of like different
ranges are different types of it and you
know some are effective some aren't so
it's really hard to kind of piece out
you know who's got the accurate stuff
and not and I mean I think ultimately
some of this stuff is we just don't know
yet it was the one who that's most of
what you just an adaptive multi paddock
grazing and what does that mean it just
means like your instead of kind of your
your it's a rotational grazing from what
I understand but you're kind of moving
the the herd along to these different
products and then they're like you know
they're doing their thing you know what
would you consider like a natural way
likely would have been before we came in
and shot all the Buffalo and all that
stuff and then they're rotating it so
the way I've been on I've understood it
like the more of those paddocks you can
get the better because then you're
letting the the soil and the and
everything in there like really heal and
and develop that deep root system as
well as some of that microbiome like all
the insects and things that would be in
there right and all that stuff so you
would need massive amounts of land and
massive amounts of areas for them to
graze I think yeah I mean I think you
would need I think the more the better
is probably the way to look at it but
hopefully the the soil biologists are
cringing yeah I'm sure there are we
apologize in advance but like the
interesting thing though is like I mean
I think there's a lot of work to be done
in looking at this and finding out the
best way to maybe utilize it but the
thought the part that I thought was
really interesting is with the will
Harris white oak pastures thing they
just I think this study is maybe over
utilized by
like the the pro regenerative or multi
paddock group to a degree because it's
like it's what they have I mean it's
what they're looking for they're looking
for a specific answer meaning this is
good this is the way we found a way
where you can eat meat and not feel bad
yeah yeah and it's the thing that's
compelling about that study to me is the
the way it kind of happened was
essentially what happened was will
Harris and WeDo Packers they were they
were raising raising animals for for
epic bar like that that was one of their
buyers and epic bar got acquired by was
General Mills and so General Mills
looked at what epic bar was claiming
when they were the independent and they
were saying like our stuff is
regenerative ours you know you eat you
buy our product and you're giving back
versus taking kind of a mindset and I
think General Mills was skeptical about
that so they spent I think was like
$80,000 to go in and have a study done
on on will Harris's White Oaks pasture
to really see if they could back that
claim up and they went in and they did
the study and it actually showed like on
that carbon sequestration versus like
they weren't even neutral they actually
pulled in more than they put out so this
is from epics particular type of farming
that they at least at White Oaks pasture
so I mean again that's one specific
situation or one specific environment or
area so I think where people run into
maybe a potential problem is can we
extrapolate that forward to other areas
are we gonna get that same result or is
it gonna be different right that's
what's important too I mean it and it
really is important to look at that
honestly mm-hmm because even though you
do have this one area is that because of
the environment where this farm is
taking place is it because the
particular soil soil quality like what
are the factors that allow them to have
so it's it it actually takes carbon out
of the atmosphere like a certain
percentage so instead of adding carbon
it actually removes some yeah because I
guess the the way was described to me is
that the inputs of that type of system
are so low that like you're not look as
if you'd look at just a normal like
agricultural setup you know you have all
these inputs of like manure and all
these other things that are going
add to that then that net effect or that
that that net negative effect of animal
agriculture so when you reduce the
inputs down to next to nothing because
your inputs are all kind of just
manpower where you're moving these
things around and letting the natural
course of things happen all the time
that's where you can maybe minimize some
of these like I guess put you maybe call
out to cut tertiary damage of animal
agriculture but you know I think I think
we probably have a lot to learn and
stuff with that stuff too but it's one
of the things when I think about it's
like it
hopefully we're spending a lot of time
looking at that stuff because if they're
right about the number of harvests we
have left I think what is estimated we
have I 60 harvests left
I mean clearly regardless of whether
you're vegan carnivore or somewhere in
between you know we need quality soil
right right what about hydroponic
because I know that there are some
large-scale hydroponic operations that
are growing vegetables and things along
those lines and some people think that
there's real promise in that because
you're not you're not using soil at all
you're not using you're not devastating
they're already depleted ground soil and
you also don't need to do all the the
harmful things that are involved in mono
crop agriculture right like the the
devastation on the wildlife the
displacement of wildlife pesticides
combines they're indiscriminately
indiscriminately chewing up small
rodents and bugs and rabbits and
anything else that gets caught in their
blades yeah yeah you know that'd be
interesting I don't know a whole lot
about it other than what it is
so I mean I'm all for solutions yeah
somebody sent me a link to something
that some indication that there might be
some promise and hydroponic agriculture
but so but the thing about this whole
idea was the name of the farm were that
this was done where there's light oak
white are catchers is that sustainable
like nationally I'm gonna forget about
global ability even nationally in terms
of like the the needs that people have
for for B for me we we use so much beef
in this country yeah I don't know for
sure like what the scalability of that
would be my guess is like at this point
it would be because it's pretty small
like even from a percentage standpoint
of what is
how much of that type of process is
being used it's like a single percentage
or something like that so we're all
grass-fed meat right all grasping yeah
meat is like less than 3% yeah so it
seems like we'd have a long ways to go
but I mean I guess the the counter to
that would also be were essentially
going back to what we would have been
doing historically mm-hmm and so it's
not necessarily like reinventing the
wheel as much as it is just saying okay
what we did here obviously is not
sustainable or potentially not
sustainable so let's look at well what
did we do to get back to where we were
before
I guess maybe is the way to look at that
but how did you get linked up with Shawn
but Shawn is such a polarizing figure
because yes he's the carnivore go-to guy
and he's like a full-on carnivore zealot
as it were yeah I mean he doesn't even
he thinks vegetables are bad for me so I
think Shawn sometimes gets
misrepresented and part of it is just
like you know way he interacts on social
media and stuff but he's uh you know I
met Shawn like before he I think went
full carnivore but on Twitter and we I
thought he was an interesting person not
because of what he ate
so what's he doing back then was he was
he was kind of more like high fat low
carb I think something pretty similar to
what I've been doing
maybe maybe less carbohydrates since his
activity levels are like really short
and fast and you know I just thought he
was an interesting person because of his
background I mean he's you know a
Highlands game athlete professional
rugby player he's doing this
high-intensity gigantic yeah yeah I mean
he's twice my size like it so it's like
my thought is like okay here's a guy who
has a similar nutrition plan that I do
but he's doing the exact opposite
athlete type stuff he's twice the size
of me like if we're kind of two ends
that expect ends of the spectrum from
like an athletic standpoint so like I
was just interested in kind of like you
know what he was doing and what he was
up to and that's kind of why we started
the podcast together and but yeah I mean
when you one of the things that she
always says on the podcast I think is is
a kind of a better reflection I mean
it'll say I don't the only thing I know
for certain is that I'm wrong about
something so it's like you know it it
gets I think it gets tough for someone
like him who gets identified as the
the face of the carnivore movement
because then like you get all the
positive and a negative coming your way
too and I mean you can feed into that
but I mean when we when we record our
podcasts and stuff is he I mean he's a
very open-minded person we're looking
for answers and we're asking questions
and things like that and it's it's it's
you know it's a learning experience I
think for me anyway so well he clearly
enjoys fucking with vegans well yeah and
it's he's been on this fruitarian kick
lately which is kind of hilarious i
didn't know there was that many of those
people out there yeah one of them just
died one one fruitarian doctor died
during a fast
really yeah and Shaun was talking about
on his YouTube channel there there's
people out there that think that you
could just get by by only eating fruit
mmm Jesus Christ folks you know I've got
a theory with like social media and that
stuff in general is that like for a lot
of a lot of the people who are most
active on it it's like they're they
either take it 100% serious or it's like
kind of a joke or a game and then when
those two polar ends meet it's that's
where you get the big kind of like you
like blow up interactions and then yeah
and then it becomes the like kind of a
game of like well the vegan told me that
like I should die or something like that
so now I'm gonna go tell that vegan that
you know this is that and it goes back
and forth back and forth back so stupid
this is such a waste of time but the
most interest the one I always get a
kick out of though along those lines is
someone will come up with like a picture
of like here's here's the humans you
know jaw system and this clearly means
were were frugivores and then someone
will say well look at the the digestive
tract of a human being it is clearly
designed more to be eating meat or
animal products and you know they go
back and forth with different like parts
of the human anatomy to try to like
prove that were vegetarian or vegan
fruitarian organs are so stupid and then
I'm thinking the whole time I'm like so
what we have here is people who can have
to have specific traits that are good
for eating fruits and vegetables and
some specific traits they're good for
eating animal products so we're
omnivores it's biologically it's been
established not there's no real
controversy the controversies fake
look particularly from the vegans where
they say they were herbivores and our
jaws are designed to crush you know
right roots and shit like no no no we
had tools and fire yeah for fucking
hundreds of thousands of years you
knuckleheads you know who one of them of
my favorite podcast we've done was with
this guy uh dr. bill Schindler he's an
archaeologist I would have I think it's
Washington University and he's such a
cool dude he like totally what he said
something I was really resonated with me
where he said you know humans were were
unique in that like we we we've we've
like over time developed ways to use
like tools and things like that to
liberate nutrients so to look at
anything in its raw state is kind of the
missed the point of why humans are the
way they are sure we'll like lentils
mm-hmm right I've seen this argument
that human beings aren't supposed to eat
meat because if we were we would be able
to just wrap it apart and eat it with
our own teeth and go go eat a squirrel
with your face well guess what you can
eat a squirrel with your face if you're
so inclined if you really wanted to do
that you could do it without tools
uh-huh you know you can't do you can't
eat a lot of beans if I'm cooking them
like we have we've figured things out
folks
I mean cassava in the jungle they
figured out that you have to cook this
stuff and strain it and it's a primary
staple of the diets of many people that
live in the in the jungle you know and
it's fucking toxic is shit if you don't
do that I mean it literally produces
cyanide cyanide is produced by ska Tsavo
which is like one of their primary foods
they just figured it out just like you
figured out you have to boil lentils
just like you figured out you have to
cook beans uh-huh I mean you can't eat
most of these things that we eat are not
good to eat if you just eat them in
their raw state some things like fruits
are some vegetables are but some just
are not and this is the same with meat
and this this idea that you're supposed
to be where we're clearly an herbivore
because of the fact that we you know
we're not supposed to be you know
killing animals with our teeth like
that's so dumb like we we kill animals
with tools and we've done it for so long
that our bodies have adapted we've
adapted to the fact that we have clothes
that's why we're not covered in hair you
can fucking idiot like this is like real
clear obvious stuff people who live in
the coldest climates of the world
aren't covered in hair you know yeah you
know and it was interesting because like
what you're saying too when when we had
bill on the show he he's got this eunuch
experience what he's actually gone in
and visited these indigenous tribes have
been relatively untouched by modern
society to basically with the one
question or level how do you eat so he's
been he seemed like a variety of
different stuff I think even had a show
on National Geographic for a while that
looked into some of this but he just to
show you the polarization of what humans
can kind of do he he went he visited the
Sun burrow which is a branch of the
Maasai over in Africa you know they're
they're basically drinking blood and
milk for the for a huge portion of their
nutrition and you know so you have this
this this tribe that's basically on a
primarily animal-based nutrition plan
and they're super healthy he said that
there may be one of the most healthy
groups of people he's seen from just
like a physical stature like toothed
health and that sort of thing but then
he also went down to I think was in
South America camera the name of the
tribe but they found a way to basically
liberate nutrients from a poisonous
potato and Sabah is that what it was me
that's what we're talking about okay
yeah um yeah so I think it was maybe was
cassava or maybe there's other ones yeah
they think there is a purple some weird
purple potato that has a similar sort of
a toxic profile yeah and what he said
was this this tribe they're a basically
mostly potatoes what they would do is
they'd literally dig like a pit and put
like some like like thousands of pounds
of these potatoes in there and let them
sit there and like ferment I guess for
like up into six months oh and then they
would actually make this a clay that
they would use and because there was
still a toxin or something though that
they needed to kind of prevent from like
interacting Oh some totally different
yeah so they would they take that this
clay and as a potato and when they dip
the potato in this clay its it like
binds to that toxin so it becomes it
doesn't become an issue when you eat it
so like by itself that potato could
potentially kill you I guess but with
the clay it doesn't and so I was like
how the fuck did they figure that out
that's what I want to know I'm thinking
like how much trial and error goes into
that it's like oh this guy dropped dead
this guy dropped oh this guy lived I
guess there's so many things like that
in the jungle you just have to really
wonder how do they develop all these
different menace
all these different ways of eating thing
it's just fascinating when like your I
guess when your only goal when you wake
up in the morning is to find your next
meal yeah and you know kind of build
build enough around so that you can kind
of survive like you put a lot of time
and energy into it but yeah it is
interesting to think like how they all
got passed along from generation to
generation and how it got fine-tuned to
where it is today
but I think it's it's cool to look at
that stuff when it just comes to your
own nutrition too and kind of when you
understand like it's less about like
this food is net bad for me or this this
food is this particular food item is bad
for me across the board and this one is
great for me across the board more so
about well this is what this food does
well this is what this one does well so
let's find it like you mentioned mix and
match to where you get get the profile
that you're looking for
yeah I think the problem is what we're
saying before is that people are
entering into these conversations with
this this goal that they want to achieve
this goal being plants are bad for you
or meat is bad for you or we're supposed
to be only eating meat or we're supposed
to be only eating plants and here's why
and you know you have this confirmation
bias you're not looking at any other
piece of evidence and particularly the
biological variability of human beings
is pretty incredible yeah I mean I can
eat peanuts all day long if you're
allergic to peanuts you're dead if you
eat one yeah I mean it's it's uh we're
we're strange creatures and what does
this change you what do you got here
Jamie the ancient oh here it is
the ancient and ancient Andean tradition
of eating clay may have helped to
protect health I think it goes back to
ancient Egypt I was just trying to Wow
how far back this goes and probably just
you could still buy clay dust right now
it's my kind of looking that up too so
eating dirt it's good for you yeah for
this they found a way to like package
the dust and right pravin clay dust this
is a whole history on potatoes here it
is the world and like while potatoes are
laced with solanine and Toma teen toxic
compounds believed to defend plants
against attacks from dangerous organisms
like fungi bacteria and human beings we
are dangerous organisms cooking often
breaks down such chemical defenses but
solanine and toma teen are unaffected by
heat in the
Mountains I'll say that word Guan Guan
echo in vicuna like llamas wild
relatives of the llama lick clay before
eating poisonous plants the fucking
llamas figured it out the toxin stick
more technically absorbed to the fine
clay particles in the animal stomachs
passing through the digestive system
without affecting it mimicking this
process mountain peoples apparently
learned to dunk wild potatoes in a gravy
made of clay and water eventually they
bred less toxic potatoes though some of
the old poisonous varieties remain
flavored for their resistance to furrow
favored for their resistance to frost
clay dust is still sold in Peruvian and
Bolivian markets to accompany them Wow
interesting
it's crazy I bet it tastes like shit
though still dirt you're eating dirt
with potatoes but look people do what
they got to do to stay alive
yes that's we're just so fortunate we
don't have to do that it isn't go to a
crossroads and have a nice vegan meal
feel you want to you're not really
worried about staying alive anymore
we're worried ok primarily about yeah
about well you know people are worried
about the environment and worried about
the health consequences of certain diets
and the environmental consequences of
certain diets and you know and these
people this is what I've really gotten
into after Chris crecer was on the
podcast recently debunking the game
changers when he was talking about the
positive net benefits of regenerative
farming I don't think that's clearly
been established worldwide or in in
large scale like in terms of and maybe
it can be like can we do it right feed
yeah yeah can we feed the entire country
on that I mean I don't I'm not yeah you
know I think that's I mean that's the
million-dollar question right now -
right like well how are we gonna feed
however many they're predicting like how
we're gonna be the 10 billion people
we're going to see in X number of years
and I think it's interesting and it's
certainly worth thinking about
but like it's also like well how far do
we keep kicking that ball down the road
before we find ourselves in a situation
where like you know then what's the next
question 15 billion 20 billion and so on
and so forth and eventually like
you know we just over populate the world
and it ends really badly for us diseases
usually follow overpopulation I think
the real key for us I think is going to
be and I think this is within our
lifetime is going to be lab-created meat
and I think they're really close to
doing that and I think if you have some
sort of ethical lab-created nutritious
meat where you don't have to worry about
suffering or death if if this has been
established then we open up a whole new
avenue of exploration because now you
can say okay all these people that are
vegan for this moral and ethical sort of
dilemma that they have with animal
agriculture killing animals suffering
let's take all that out now you can eat
lab-created meat that has absolutely no
suffering attached to it let's find out
how healthy things really are and let's
find out how many people stay vegan and
how many people revert to more
omnivorous diet which I mean there's
time this is something that vegans hate
to hear but it is a fact eighty-four
percent of people who start a vegan diet
quit now is that because of taste is
that because of and then there's the
argument that well people that do it
over a long period of time you get a
higher retention rate that's fine but
eighty-four percent still is the number
it doesn't matter if you get a high
retention rate for people that have
doing it more than two years in more
than three years
I'll give you stick with it you can do
it no they're just more committed but
the reality is 84 percent quit this is
what's been firmly established what what
would the number be if there was a cycle
humane lab created meat that had no
suffering attached to it at all it's
just science-based it's just made with
compounds and you know whatever they use
to create this stuff that would be
interesting it'd be interesting to find
out could we eliminate large-scale
animal agriculture in favor of
lab-created meat and what if any
environmental factors would there be
that would be negative that we're
attached to lab-created me because you
have to think whenever you're making
anything right industrial large-scale
you're gonna have waste
what is that waste can that waist be
mitigated can they figure out some sort
of a way to have some sort of net
positive effect where
waste is utilized in some sort of form
where it's it actually can contribute to
the natural processes of you know soil
regeneration and manure and you know you
composting and things along those lines
ya know I think it's I think it's
interesting and we're in a interesting
time for sure it'll be interesting to
see where they get with with that and
and everything else with that and you
know it you brought up an interesting
point too not to keep going down the
rabbit hole but the other thing that I
thought really interesting was when you
look at waste components I feel like
we're not maybe looking at that as much
as as we should be when we're talking
about trying to feed a bunch of people's
like well maybe we should start with
what we're throwing away that we
wouldn't have - oh yeah and I think like
at first I just thought like well you
know there's a lot of food thrown away
at restaurants there's a lot of stuff
that's thrown away just because it
doesn't meet standards for like the
grocery store it's like let's start
there and I actually had asked dr.
Schindler about that he actually did a
study with some of his grad students
where they looked at I think I took 30
white-tailed deer and they they
processed it down to like the very last
potential calorie to find out how much
is wasted even in like a you know a deer
that the say you go and you shoot a deer
and then you could take it to the the
process and get it all done he said it
was between I think it was between like
13 to 30 days worth of human nutrition
that gets wasted you know a single
white-tailed deer so like well here's
the problem with that idea a waste is
only if you do something with it if you
leave it in the field there's no waste
right but if you just killed a deer that
it's not it just left it there there's
no waste it's you're feeding animals
right I mean they're going to absolutely
destroy that thing it's gonna be gone in
a short period of time including the
bone so it'll delete the bones and if
they don't eat the bones the bones will
eventually deteriorate and become part
of the soil this is what happens when
animals die sure so I guess maybe the
way to look at them is like what are we
if we're looking to just if our
objective is to feed as many people as
possible and we're maximizing the amount
of nutrients we can acquire from a
specific thing like we're leaving a lot
on the table or we're giving a lot to
different areas like different animals
and things that are going well we're
doing it wrong you know we're putting
our waste and bags and
throwing it into the ground fills I mean
it landfills have you seen they did this
aerial study of Los Angeles they're
trying to find out where most of the
methane comes from they were trying to
go it's fuckin landfills man landfills
are disgusting and this is not how it's
supposed to be it's supposed to be
animals so are supposed to have access
to what's left over I mean this is what
would happen if a bear killed a moose
all right if a bear killed a moose
that's gonna consume a big portion of
the body and then it's gonna leave
whatever is left and then rodents and
vultures and and then eventually insects
and bacteria are gonna break it down and
this is a natural cycle of life for
animals this is how it's supposed to be
what we do is we take it we cut it up we
eat some of it we throw some of it away
we put that in a plastic bag we zip tie
it we've did a fucking hole in the
ground and we throw that bag in there
it's not it's ludicrous
yeah it's we know better we do know
better we understand the whole process
of these things breaking down in the
wild and what happens to them we
understand there's animals that their
entire diet consists of eating animals
that other animals have killed and they
leave some of it behind that's we're
supposed to leave it behind it's
supposed to be a part of the whole cycle
of life we were supposed to compost all
these things are supposed to be natural
weed you know when I was a kid my mom
and my stepdad were part of this
cooperative farm thing and we started
composting and I'm we didn't do it for
very long because we eventually wound up
moving and we stopped we stopped being a
part of this thing but I thought it was
really interesting because I was a
little kid or thing like oh I never
thought of that before you take your
food waste and you separate it from like
paper uh-huh give your paper waste and
then you have like leftover tomatoes or
something like that and all that would
go into one specific bin and that bin
would go into this big thing it was like
it was made with like chicken wire and
leaves and you had a lid over it and
like it was a wood box and you would
throw everything in there and it would
all sort of rot in compost and then you
would take that stuff and you would use
it in the garden
and this is this is how composting is
done this is how fertilizer is made and
this is what you're supposed to do yeah
this is like small-scale regenerative
farming and what we're doing is assholes
we take our food we put in fucking bags
we zip tie it shut and we chuck it in
the ground it's dumb it's a really dumb
way of doing things I just feel like
that there's something that we could
really leverage at the educational level
like yeah we've got schools where we we
were housing these kids and like you
know one of the biggest hurdles I think
is like we got them indoors sitting in
desks for seven eight hours a day and
then we what why not get them out and
learn that and do that and we have these
mini little like regenerative areas sure
then you learn it and then it doesn't
get forgotten when you're an adult as
easily but we're so enamoured with this
idea of working you know we're so
enamored with this idea of getting a job
we're so enamored with this idea of the
structure of civilization as it stands
in 2019 is the way to go so we're
teaching kids how to complete this this
life that they're born into the way it's
established for their parents the way
it's established for their neighborhood
get in your car drive to work work all
day come home you know eat what you can
throw the rest of the garbage go back to
work in the morning and this is nonsense
this is not how you have to do it you
don't you don't have to do anything
there's a bunch of different ways to
live this life and there's only a
hundred years if you're lucky so this
thing that we're setting up we're
setting up kids to essentially be as
miserable as everybody else before them
doing the exact same thing that
everybody else has done like maybe you
can get lucky like I have been or like
you've been and you find something that
you actually enjoy doing then you get
lucky like oh my god you know Zak found
a job that he really loves and he got
really good at it and now he actually
has joy in what he does but there's
there's a lot of different places in
this this country alone where you can
live and you could do things in a
non-traditional manner and you can get
by and you probably be healthier and
happier than someone that gets stuck in
the same goddamn Civilization cycle this
industrialized cycle sure that we're all
in and we don't teach kids that well we
teach kids is here's
history hears math get your SATs in get
the score go to the college that you
want get a job and this is the the
standard path that seems to be rewarded
and this is what and if you say well I'm
gonna drop out and find myself oh good
luck loser you know you're gonna fuck up
your life you know what are you doing
man you don't even go into college Jesus
Christ like and it's very unfortunate
that we have this incredibly rigid
system and and it really makes people
feel like made me feel like a failure I
didn't fit into the system I just
because of I have a DD or whatever
emotional issues whatever I had I just
could not sit still in class and
concentrate I had way too much fucking
energy and this is just this was just
not for me I was twiddling my thumbs and
tapping the floor and looking at the
clock and a critic luck yes when that
fucking thing hit I was gone and I
didn't want to do home I'd literally
didn't do any homework my entire high
school career I didn't do anything I
just got by being smart enough to pass
tests by learning what I learned in
class and not putting in any fucking
extra effort I just wanted to get out
and I found something that I was good at
I figured it out I file I got lucky
that I did that but for a lot of people
they just live these lives of
frustration you know and they never do
find and they're not taught to find a
thing and there's also I think there's a
great satisfaction to working on
something that you enjoy whether it's
working with your hands or working on
something that's creative and working
with the land you know you talked to
people that run their own little organic
farms like I know this couple that runs
an organic farm and man when they talk
about their their food they talk about
the vegetables they grow and the stuff
they grow they like beam excited about
it they're excited is it's a natural
there's there's an there's natural
there's a gravity that we have towards
that it's a natural human reward to be
able to cultivate your own food if you
didn't make a salad out of some stuff
that you grew yourself man that feels
amazing it really does and there's
people that could be making a living
doing that and they're never encouraged
to do so and they might be way happier
than selling insurance yeah yeah no I
I think I could feed other people to men
that's the other thing like if you could
figure out a way to run an organic
garden and you do compost you don't use
pesticides you do everything organic and
everything is regenerative and you
actually can feed people oh my god wait
how good would you feel pretty
satisfying yes yeah I would think I
would think really satisfying it's not
for everybody it's gotta be for somebody
yeah and they're not being no one's
teaching you that it's cool right yeah
you have to be one of those outside the
box thinkers because schools essentially
set up for scale right it's gonna set up
for you got 500 kids you got to turn
them into not losers
yeah good 500 kids to not be a loser
well just standard path you know like
this like standard American diet so
exist entered American education these
like standard paths that will work for X
amount of people you get ten people
seven of them won't be losers if you
just shove them into this machine and
pump them out in this fuckin form yeah
it's a bummer uh-huh we're now here
we're getting education advice from the
ultra marathon runner yeah but you're a
good guy to get education advice from
blood was a teacher for five years so
well it's also you're you're a
successful guy at an unusual thing you
know you found a thing that you really
excel at that you actually enjoy yeah
and that is for so many people the
ultimate goal of life like if you can
make a lot of money in this life but you
will not be as happy in so it's really
contrary to like capitalist ideas like
we were taught to think that the more
money you make them to happier you'll be
that's definitely not true but you will
make more money if you're happier with
what you do which is sounds like a
contradiction but it's not you'll excel
and if you're excelling you'll
profitable obviously there's some things
that you can excel out that are just
there's no fucking way to make a lot of
money as a bowler you know if you like
I'm really in a bowling well you're kind
of fucked because it's just one of those
things that nobody gives a shit about
everybody something else you're
interested in - yeah yeah that'd be nice
you found something actually paid the
bills but if you can find something that
you enjoy you'll have an infinitely
happier life it's just you you can do
that you just have to find those you
have to explore those things and I think
that's where we fail kids
we failed kids and giving them
this landscape of possibilities that
actually does exist I think there's a
landscape of possibilities for what you
can do and everyone is gently I don't
want to be an ultramarathon runner man
right if you and I are competing I'm
fucked okay I'm not going to win I'm not
gonna excel I'm built like a champ I'm
not I'm not the guy that's supposed to
be running 200 miles it's just your
realm and it's also it's not what I
don't desire to do that conversely if
you had to become a stand-up comedian
you'd probably like well fuck this I
don't want to do any thinking about
things that's funny and the first time
you bomb you're like what am I doing
with my life and it's everybody has a
different personality and these
different personalities and these
different interests and desires they
take different paths and I think we need
to open that up to people more and and
just sort of in some way encourage
people to seek more to seek to genuinely
try to find the things that interest you
maybe you should be a fly fishing guide
you know maybe you should be a guy who
makes homemade mugs out of exotic
hardwood you know maybe you know maybe
you're a knife maker maybe you're a
person who maybe should make fucking
dream catchers I don't know don't make
dream catchers does anybody really like
dream catchers those like something you
buy and then you put it on the wall and
you go what the fuck am i doing am i
pretending I'm in a Native American or
something but there's things you can do
men you just have to find that thing and
I think that's so hard for people and
that's why people when they find someone
like yourself that's doing this unusual
unorthodox thing and you're extremely
successful at it that becomes so
attractive to people to hear your story
yeah and I think yeah I it's I would've
never guessed I'd be doing what I'm
doing now 10 years ago it's yes equally
surprising to me I think sometimes but
it you know it is it is interesting when
you think about just where you thought
you would maybe be and then where you
end up and all that stuff in-between and
ultimately I think if you I think you
want to be be smart about stuff like I
didn't necessarily just quit my job and
Sam would be an ultramarathon runner you
kind of have like a few different
options available or you just keep
options open to like for me personally I
like to coach too so I'm gonna do some
of that and that
supplement things and then you know
podcasting has always been a fun thing
to do so historically I always go on
podcast and then a couple years ago it
was like well if it's this much fun to
go go on them it must be fun to do them
too so you know starting these other I
think when people start kind of really
exploring where their curiosities are
you find these different avenues to and
it just kind of snowballs a little bit
as opposed to being maybe you start out
making the dreamcatcher and then you
become something else that's right you
just get really in the feathers yeah did
you ever think about doing something
like do you get revelations post
training do some other things I always
have after like really good hard
workouts first of all I'm always feel
filled with gratitude yeah I'm always
like really thankful yeah after long
hard workouts and I've thought about
doing this thing called the gratitude
series where I do a podcast like
immediately after like really hard work
out nice and just talk about my feelings
and I mean it sounds fucking corny and
it's and self-indulgent but but
realistically I think there are some
lessons that I learned off of really
hard workouts you know where it's like
at the end of it you know when it's all
done first of all there's always this
feeling like eight out of ten times I
don't want to work out mm-hmm really
eight out of ten
I work out ten out of ten uh-huh but
eight out of ten I'm like fuck this
you're always happy always always and
that's the hump man yeah that that
fucking hump of just shot that part of
your brain up and just start moving and
then once you start moving you start
breaking a sweat once you start breaking
a sweat it becomes easier it starts
feeling good then you start getting some
satisfaction like ooh I almost didn't do
this today Here I am doing it and you
know and then sometimes it's fucking you
know sometimes I'm looking at a
three-mile run which is nothing for you
but a mile in I'm like fuck two more to
go Jesus Christ and I'm running Hills
eat shit but when it's over it's like
yes you know when I get back to the car
and I'm saying hi to people hey what's
up wave it in the neighbors dogs
exhausted I'm happy everybody's pumped
you know it's like and I feel good I
feel warm I feel friendly I feel loving
I feel you know I want to call people
and tell
I care about them it's like it's like
there's moments like post-workout in
particular where you just feel really
good and I think life is sometimes about
getting over those periods of feeling
kind of shitty or low-energy or
lethargic or unrest it or whether the
fuck it is and just pushing through that
because you know the territory you've
been there before and then developing a
habit of being able to do that and being
able to know and have faith in the
process and understand that this yeah
yeah yeah I know you don't want to do it
shut the fuck up and go just go yeah
once you do go you always feel better
yeah no I hundred percent agree and I
think in my own training like I get that
from a lot of different workouts but the
one that I really love is like when I
get closer to a race and I was saying
before you start dialing things in to be
more specific to the to the activity
you're trying to prepare for I'll do a
phase of training where I'm running kind
of in an area of about like 150 155
beats per minute so I can go like on a
it's it's just fast enough where I feel
like I'm really kind of like working but
it's also slow know if I can go for
quite a while so I can like log a really
big run and when I was training for this
last race that at the Pettit Center I
had a training cycle where I hit I had a
four-week block where I had one D load
week which is basically reduction of
volume and intensity and three billers
recalls D low d load because I'm like
reducing volume and intensity and the
other three though were build up on-site
like 130 mile week some right around
hundred thirty and then 250 mile weeks
and they were just like basically loaded
with like kind of just faster than or
right about kind of hundred mile
intensity so you know I would do and you
can maybe pull it up I think I have a
picture on my Instagram page of the I
did these key workouts where I'd go to a
track and I would just do loops around
the track and it'd be like anywhere
between 27 to like 32 miles at that kind
of intensity and you just get into like
a flow and a rhythm and it just once you
kind of get moving it feels great and
afterwards yeah you you feel great the
whole rest of the day and you just want
to kind of go and do it again you almost
have to be careful not to not to do too
much but who structures those do you
structure them yourself yeah yeah it's
going to go back to where
in the beginning like when I structure a
plan ideally I start out I start out
with a good base a good aerobic base
which I typically kind of retain almost
year-round I'll take like offseason but
I like to follow principle where I'll
let myself kind of lose some of that
peak fitness just so it's sustainable
because staying at your peak fitness
level is not sustainable
so I let myself get like just out of
shape enough so that I'm not always at
that level and then I start kind of
building in the structure towards the
race itself which starts with those
shorter faster intervals since they're
further away and then I get closer and
closer to the race where I'm doing
things that are more specific so like
the next step would be I'd be doing some
longer intervals or kind of like what
you consider like an anaerobic threshold
type workout which generally speaking is
about like your max intensity if you did
like a 60-minute all-out time trial and
then you know that's still not specific
to 100 miles because I'm out there for
11 hours so I'm kind of still moving
closer to that slower race pace
yeah and it's a it may just follows the
principle of you know hitting all the
systems of training like you would in
any other paradise endurance plan but
always keeping that compass of the stuff
you do for the earth intensity of the
race itself is the type of work you
should be doing closest to it so you're
really just optimizing when you're
closer to the race itself how do you
know what your peak fitness is like when
you say that you wanna you can't really
maintain the peak fitness you want to
back off a little bit so that you can
just keep your your training running how
do you know where that is and how do you
know that you cannot expand that and
then ya know that's a great question
that's somewhat subjective too I mean
you can analyze things if you want to go
into like heart rate variability type
things if you but that's a little more
on the micro level for me personally
like usually I'll get to a point where
like I'll do a race and you know you can
just kind of tell like I'm exhausted
from that and I like to think of it kind
of two folded where like physical
recovery and mental recovery so if I do
a big race and afterwards like I can't
even like bring myself to think of
another big training block I know I need
to like let myself kind of get a little
bit out of that fitness state that peak
fitness state and just kind of reset or
hidden
that button this is just from years and
years Tyler and you mission stakes I
mean in the past you know a lot of times
they'll do well big I think I got one
more race left for me then it goes badly
right now what is a long day like say if
you're getting prepared for this
100-mile race and you know you're gonna
have to run for 11 plus hours
what's a long day for you yeah so the
longest run I did for this particular
one was three and a half hours it was I
think 32 miles or something somewhere in
that neighborhood I'll do I'll do
I usually don't push up much past five
hours in my own training if I'm gonna do
much more than that I'll just jump in a
race like the nice thing about Phoenix
is there's a race company called air
Viper and they put on like 30-some ultra
events every year so it's not Wow you
can basically it's almost every weekend
pretty much yeah that's crazy
so like the the guy who raced direct at
jamil he he'll he'll let me jump in
events when I want to and so sometimes
all if I'm gonna do something like say I
want to preparing for 100 mile and I
want to get a really long day like a
seven eight hour session in you know
I'll just pick like a like a hundred K
type event or like you know a 50 mile or
type event and just do that at like I
like to say like I try to eat those are
you know those a training tool so I
don't want to necessarily race it all
out but if you can kind of keep yourself
out like maybe 80% of what you're
capable of you can get that good long
stimulus but not necessarily beat
yourself up so much that it takes away
from the race you're preparing for and
so 50 miles would take you or how long
would that take you it depends on the
course like I just did a 50-miler
actually about a week and a half ago
called the JFK 50-mile that took me five
hours and 42 minutes and that course is
kind of it's got you go over the
Appalachian Mountains for about 60 miles
and you get on a really flat toe path
for about a marathon and then some
rolling Street Hills so that's not as
fast as you can find you can find I mean
you can go on a track how much elevation
you're going down that one was about
3,000 feet so haha it is but the funny
thing about ultramarathon especially in
north america is like you know the
trails are where a lot of you know
there's a lot of interest there so 3,000
450 is actually considered a relatively
flat fast course whoa
you know it's hilarious it's really
interesting too because like some of the
I live just about two hours south of
Flagstaff
and there's a group of ultramarathon
guys who train up there and they I got a
lot of inspiration from from two of them
specifically for this last race that
race it at the Petitte Center and one
guy's name is Jim Walmsley and he's from
my money probably the best ultra
marathoner we have certainly in North
America if not the world I mean he he's
got the course record at the western
states 100 which is the most tested
hundred mile er in North America
he's got the course record at the Lake
Sonoma 50-mile by a pretty big margin
he's actually got the two fastest times
but the next closest person him is like
18 minutes behind or something like that
and then he's also got the course record
the JFK 50-mile the one I just was
mentioning before and these three events
are three of the most tested courses
that we've had and he's got the course
records at all of them and he can
probably go faster so I mean some of his
training is like he'll do like 150 mile
week sometimes with like 30,000 feet of
climbing and ascending and the kicker is
one of his training partners Jared Hazen
so if Jim is the best ultra runner in
North America has from the male side
Jared Hazen is by far the most
underrated so this guy he ran the
western states 100 this year
Jim finished first jared finished second
Jim broke his course record by running
14 hours and nine minutes on a course
that has 17,000 feet of climbing in
23,000 feet of descent if you ran a
hundred miles with that much yeah in 14
hours in westerns yeah in western states
is considered a running course for the
most part - like there's crazier ones
that get way worse from a climbing
descending Bob yeah we have to use
trekking stick yeah yeah yeah so Jarrod
though Jarrod so Jim he had actually
broken the course record the year before
and he took like I think was like 16 or
17 minutes off the old course record
around 14 and a half hours this last
next year he broke his course record
with the 1409 Jarrod came in second and
I think it was 14 23 or 26 just behind
Jim basically pushing him all day so any
other time Jarrod would have won that
race except for that year and it would
have been like you know a huge story for
him and you know it just
I mean it was an amazing performance
when those two guys and just watching
kind of their training and then their
performances cuz I was out there
creaming and pacing my wife it was a
huge motivator for me when I kind of got
into the training build-up for that race
at the penet Center so wow it's it's
it's it's just funny with ultramarathon
because you have such a variety again I
think we talked about this bit the last
time as on you can have like these 50k
races that are like I mean there's 50k
races have 10,000 feet of climbing and
descending and then you can have these
six-day events that are on a 400 meter
track right which is much different yeah
you are doing something really bonkers
right now right you're attempting to run
across the entire country and to break
the record yeah so this is kind of in
its infancy a bit from the planning
stages so I probably won't happen in the
immediate future but someone you're very
familiar with actually Justin Wren yeah
he's got the fight for their got and I
was actually on the phone with him last
night and one thing I've kind of been
interested in since I started ultra
running is this route it's a 30 100 mile
route basically that goes from San
Francisco to New York and it's been done
by you know quite a few people with
walking running Pete Castle Nick he's
got the course record he averages like
70 miles a day yeah yeah so it's like
it's it's a pretty insane route and I've
always been interested in doing it and I
just haven't really been motivated I
guess to really
attempt it or I just didn't I guess I
just really didn't know when I would do
it I just kind of I would and then um
last year one of my one of my sponsors
the f-bomb those nut butter sachets I
love those yeah but my friend RZA and
they believe that the name should be
changed they believe nut butter has a
negative connotation to heterosexual
males who think that it's sounds like
something comes out of your deck a name
change but maybe good well I guess in
their defense theirs is called f-bomb
not not better right so right right
engine hums better right it's a better
name yeah yeah stuff I love their stuff
ya know they make a great product and
they had actually proposed a Laster that
I think they just were maybe spitballing
a little bit but they're like hey
ever interested in doing that like go
running you know doing that cross
country route and I was like yeah I've
been actually wanting to do that at some
point I just haven't gotten around with
actually planning it out how funny is
that as a statement yeah I've been
wanting to run thirty-one hundred miles
across the fucking continent and try to
beat the record which averaged 60 to 70
miles a day god damn dude how would you
prepare for that uh yeah you know I mean
I might be in super unchartered
territory because I've just haven't done
anything like that before
so it would be difficult you'd be a lot
of learning on the fly I think really
the big key thing there is you're
managing a lot of stuff with that like
you want to make sure you're sleeping
well throughout that because obviously
if you're not sleeping well it could end
badly for you pretty soon so then I
think you just end up trying to do as
much specific things as you can to
prepare without going overboard so just
a lot of time on feet I mean you can
imagine the pace is gonna be incredibly
slow there's probably be like walking
breaks I'm not gonna be like you know
certainly not gonna running 6040 a per
mile pace but my my first thought is
like I'll probably target like a 12 to
14 hour range per day and you whatever I
get out of that 12 to 14 days or hours
is what I get and then that gives me
kind of the flexibility to have like at
least ten hours of buffer to kind of
like prep and sleep and get ready for
the next day do you know Eddie Izzard is
communion uh-huh are you aware of what
he did
well you ran the entire length to the UK
yeah the outside of it with no training
right he's an animal man he really is a
special person really is a special
person I remember only knowing of him as
a comedian and you know had seen him do
a lot of stand-up before and then I
watched this documentary where he's
running I mean how many mile how many
different marathons was it was like 26
27 and 27 days 27 marathons in 27 days
he did wind up taking one day off for
his feet were literally mangled um
blisters I don't imagine he wasn't in
shape which is just fucking crazy just
sheer willpower I mean just to do one
marathon when you're not in shape I just
can't imagine the the just a fucking
sheer amount of just will just pure will
that it takes to do something like that
and to just keep pushing left right left
right left right left right even though
everything your head your brain your
feet everything stop stop stop
fuck you left right left right left
right I mean he ran how many thousand
miles was it the entire length of the UK
over the outside too though he did 43
marathons in South Africa right 43 and
51 days was his first one and then 27
and 27 days was the second one 43 43
fucking marathons the article in 2009
Queen Elliot celebrating after finishing
his 43rd marathon in 51 days he's really
really interesting guy yeah he called
he's he's Eddie Izzard but he's a
crossdresser
so he's like it's he comes out as
transgender I think but not really cuz
he likes women and he likes women as a
man he just likes dressing as a woman
he's just a really unique guy but but he
owns it you know I'm saying like he is
who he is sub 5 hour marathon the
connection is aimed at finishing on the
sub fireman Misha's target by 30 seconds
give it to him honorary 15 so fucking
interesting interesting look thoughtful
intelligent person really enjoyed
talking to him but when he's talking
about these marathons like a good Lord
man like it's hard enough for someone to
do who's like you like for a guy like
you to run 40 what how many marathons 40
what nobody say a lot let's say forward
for you to run 40 marathons in 40 days
it's fucking bonkers right yeah that'd
be a that'd be a bigger training block
than I've ever done for sure that's
crazy and you're a fucking world record
holder you got a goddamn stand-up
comedian out there right it's amazing
what people can do when they decide
they're gonna do it yes yes but yeah I
mean I think with for for this
particular run you know I probably would
have kept punting it down the road in
you know how to not talk to Justin Wren
to be honest with you like you know when
you do something like that
like part of the reason I think you do
that is for me anyway is when I see like
endurance ultra endurance sport too it
can be a very selfish sport because
you're you know you're putting in tons
of training race day is like an all-day
effort with tons of people helping you
out like they're taking time out of
their schedule their day to come out
their crew pace essentially like be your
peer support system while you're out
there kind of trying to you know do all
these things so you know part of it is
like I want to try to give back in a way
as well as as opposed to just always
going out and racing for my own my own
sake and what will be done how will it
the will you have sponsors like yeah I'm
gonna do hopefully what we'll do is I
was talking to Justin we sponsor you
absolutely really yeah yeah we wear like
a Gerry logo and one of your shirts or
something no doubt about it yeah do it
awesome we got we got one sponsor on
board here we go yeah hell yeah but yeah
so like when I talked to Justin I mean
Justin is I mean you know adjustable
he's been on the show that guy and I
think it was on here that it heard his
podcast for the first time I know I
heard him tell I guess what you would
call his origin story here and I think I
heard it again on like the mind pump
media guy's podcast and it's when I
described just listening to Justin wrens
podcasts or his interviews to people I
tried to say like well it kind of comes
in these stages where he tells his
background story of like his experience
with bullying and at first you just your
heart just sinks for the guy you're
thinking like well how could anyone have
to go through that I would never want
him to go through that and you kind of
transition into this phase of like you
kind of get nervous and anxious because
you're thinking like well who did I say
something mean to when I was younger or
who did I who did I potentially affect
in a negative way and then it's like
then you just want to try to do
something to support and you know it's
really when you look at someone like
Justin Ren it's it's mind-boggling to me
that this guy isn't like an
internationally-known
hero or leader yeah yet anyway well he's
becoming he's getting big he's getting
big I mean the only thing that's holding
him back keeps getting sick yeah well
and that's just fucking crazy you know
his parasites he's right now they know
what they are yeah I picked up some
parasites in the Congo they can't even
identify the
specifically uh-huh and it's he's really
suffering and you would never know
talking to him like he just goes about
it like the guy's gotten Millea like
most people would probably say okay I
went over to Africa
I got malaria I helped some people out
I'm good I'm good now now someone will
raise some money for this charity and
we'll send it over to him or something I
know he keeps going back and keeps
getting malaria three times yeah and now
he's no parasite so like when I think of
like what we I think maybe like I mean
Justin Ren is like next-level when it
comes to like a leader I think and I
think in the current especially in the
current climate like you know our
leaders today tend to be you know people
like celebrities athletes and then
politicians and things like that and
it's like I you look around and it can
be very underwhelming about just like
you know some of like like how badly are
like how badly are people actually
trying to help people and how how much
how many of these like politicians
actually care about poor people how many
of them actually care about someone
who's disenfranchised or how much how
many are they doing it doing it just get
elected right did they actually care
Justin it's just care yes it's all
innocent there's no worry at all about
ulterior motives they don't exist
there's no ulterior motive to sleep on a
dirt floor in a grass shack with the
pygmies like he's done for months at a
time
he's just doing it for love yeah yeah so
I think like when when when I look at
like I think people want to help and I
think people want to do things that are
good for Humanity but oftentimes they
don't necessarily have that example to
kind of like to lead the way then they
they look into a void in some cases and
I think Justin is the type of person who
you know if the more people we can get
to know about him his story and what
he's trying to do on the the wells and
the farms and with the pygmy as well as
his new branch on anti-bullying the
batter so when I reached out to him I
was actually like kind of surprised like
I shot him a note on I think Instagram
and Twitter and I thought that he's
probably gonna see it he's not following
me and he responded in like less than a
couple hours like you followed me
responded back and he's just like this
is so awesome I feel super honored that
you'd wanna you know help out in some
way
it's like he's just always looking for
opportunities to help promote this great
cause so then you know when I got that
response from him it was like
clarification of what I think I some I
already knew about the guy just from
listening to him on your show and others
that you know he's really in this for a
big reason and if if we need a fast
track this cross-country event to bring
him some some awareness we'll see what
we can do but he's in everything he does
he does to help and promote other people
even when I was trying to talk to him
about his parasite
I had a key didn't want to yeah get him
on track he's like you got to interview
my doctor and what's going on man what's
happening with you because I worry about
the guy because yeah he's so selfless
when he's talking about like blacking
out and all these like like after
training they got to get him in the
shower because he's shivering he's pale
white and like bro what is going on with
you like what is this he's like oh you
got to meet my doctor he's amazing like
stop stop with the fucking doctor I
gonna want to get what is happening he
doesn't want to talk about himself
it's amazing the most selfless person
I've ever ever talked he's talking about
fighting again right he's getting over
these incredible bouts of antibiotics
that you know weaken your ligaments
right like when you take cipro or any of
these like super intense antibiotics one
of the side effects is a lot of times
people get injured like your ligaments
get injured because apparently there's a
weakening effect which is really kind of
it's really fascinating when you think
about the human body as an overall
organism and that it's really an
ecosystem and that when you flood
antibiotics into that ecosystem to try
to prevent disease from destroying it
you also have these unintended side
effects and one of them is weakened
ligaments and there's a lot of a
correlation between people getting staph
infection and then blowing out knees
ACLs you know tendons and things along
those lines afterwards so he both of his
shoulders are fucked you know and this
is post antibiotics and yet he's still
talking about fighting so you can bring
more awareness to the pygmies I'm like
bro please stop just get your shoulders
fixed yeah whatever you got going on
let's let's heal that up for
and then also find out what the fuck
this parasite is that you don't even
know what this didn't even know this is
he's not even thinking about himself is
like if I can get in and get a fight in
by the end of the year I'm at the end of
the year man it's fucking December like
stop it you're not getting in by the end
of the year you're not getting in the
beginning of 2020 let's heal up heal up
we gotta want you healthy yeah I'm such
a rare totally selfless person and he
saw such a powerful force for good for
those peoples the people that live in
the Congo and what he's done for them I
mean I don't know how many wells they've
built so far but they made an alliance
with the cash app which is one of my
sponsors so every time someone downloads
the cash app when they use the code Joe
Rogan whether it's for Google for
Android or for I've for an iPhone for
Apple you get $10 goes to this cause so
they've raised hundreds of thousands of
dollars and they're building wells right
now it's just this amazing thing that
he's done and he's just like you feel
like a piece of shit
like when you're around him you're like
why am I not just nice he's so nice it's
it's like it was enough for him to find
people who were hard off he had to go
and find the most forgotten most hard
off yeah that's right there's like so
many people in Africa have it Robbie
there's no know who's got the roughest
yeah yeah that live and you know and on
top of that the guy's a world-class
mixed-martial yeah awesome he really is
he's one of the best heavyweights in the
world and how much better would he be if
he was selfish and they spent all of his
time training and not getting middle
area three times not having this unknown
parasite that they think might be in his
fucking brain I mean they don't even
know what I was just reading this story
about some guy who was having seizures
and it turns out he had all these worms
in his brain and I'm like and I was
thinking about Justin I'm it was from
uncooked pork from this ah and Justin
they think the problem with the Congo is
it's so remote and you don't get a lot
of people to go there and get diseases
and then come back so they might not
they don't even know what this is might
be something that no one's ever got
before sure and then made it back to
Western civilization to be examined yeah
Wow yeah Wow
what the hell man
yeah and then you would never know
talking to him no you just doesn't want
to talk about it yeah let's talk about
his friend hey you got to get my friend
on the podcast he's really sweet it's a
great guy makes makes kites like once
each kite is gonna generate X amount
dollars from your bottle up Justin red
and feed it to everyone I guess well you
know it's an interesting I'm not just an
interesting it's a it's a beautiful sort
of expression of what can happen to a
person when they experience deep pain
and sadness and then they find a way out
and then they find a way to help other
people and that's sort of what he's done
you know his childhood was really rough
and he came out of that a super kind
person as opposed to being angry and
mean I mean this is what we need more in
the world right we need more people
building people up and helping and less
people tearing people down and then
hating means so much of so much of what
social media is used for and so much of
what the Internet is used for is hate
his anger there's so much anger you know
and to see someone like Justin this rare
soul that has found a way to almost
universe I mean like everything he does
is channeled towards good all of it you
know including kicking people's asses
yeah which is like how do you make that
good you found it found a way to make
kicking people's asses a good thing it's
beautiful I'm really honored to be his
friend say he's one of my you know there
were the rarest people that I know yeah
no doubt no I'd say it's been cool to
hear his story and you know I think
thanks to you he's probably got a much
bigger audience too so so what are you
thinking about in terms of the timeline
uh well so if if I go and try to get
close to or right around the the record
for that it's you know about a 40-day
ish timeframe give or take so you're
really I think the biggest hurdle or
planning thing is to find the timeline
where you're gonna run into the least
amount of weather issues because when
you're going across the country so
you're going over the Sierras and you're
going through the you know the middle of
the country and then all that stuff so
obviously you don't want to be going
over mountain passes in the middle of
winter but you probably don't also want
to be going through
the Midwest in the middle of the summer
so some of us can be kind of planning
around around that there's there's
probably some good opportunities in the
spring in the fall that kind of catched
that window of moderate temps versus
extremes
what's the gentleman that did it before
a peak oscillate do you know Pete yeah
yeah it is
man runs from San Francisco to New York
and record time look at that guy still
dazed peeps oh fuck you want to hear
something crazy about Pete though so he
did that and then that wasn't enough
because he I think this was a year ago
or two years ago he went up in Alaska
and went from Alaska down to the
southern tip of Florida all by himself
with just like one of those push
strollers and he averaged like I think
was like 50 miles a day or something
like that so yeah folks if he went from
Alaska to Florida yeah yeah he did I
forget what the English roller so that's
his food his foods in the stroller yeah
he was shocked bro
you know it was funny it was I was about
kind of following and while he did it
crazies got a baby stroller with food in
it what a crazy idea
he uh he did when I was following him
like I you know he was logging all his
runs on Strava so it was hilarious to
see like these these weeks after weeks
where it's like 50 mile day 50 mile a 50
mile day like you know like 350 400 mile
weeks and stuff like that and then if
you like zoomed in on his routes you
could see like he'd be on this round
also he seemed deviate a little bit
you'd assume any like oh there's a
grocery store there that's why he turned
to fill up his baby car my food where'd
he keep his money I don't know I am the
baby carbo bleed I'm trying to steal
that baby cart where'd he sleep I think
he stayed at hotels if I'm not mistaken
okay I'd have to I'd have to look to
bring the baby card up the stairs yeah
yeah Jesus Christ there's crazy people
out there yeah there's different kind of
humans right like yeah you have this
idea of like what a person is capable of
and you see someone like dining okay
I've got to rethink this uh-huh
people are capable of way more ya know
yeah it's it's nuts when you think about
as soon as you think you find
limitations then also and some goes out
and does does something crazier or
bigger or better and the baby stroller
from Alaska to Florida what the fuck man
um did you
talk to him at all about this idea I
haven't yet no I mean it's been are you
going to yeah reach out to him he'll be
good about it I think yeah yeah yeah
he's a nice guy I know Pete so how many
people have done this run hey you know I
don't even know it's been it's a
documented route so it's been done done
you could probably google it and find
out and I'll buddy I it's it's probably
it's more than you'd think
it just really usually comes down and
actually you just and work with someone
earlier who did it walking I think I
think a maybe was a slightly different
route but it was basically the same
premise and he walked like some 20-some
miles a day or something like that and
was raising raising funds and awareness
for fight for the Forgotten - so we'll
maybe talk to him a bit - so um
the idea is late summer early fall
something like that yeah that's probably
ideal I think you want to try to catch
you want to get away from winter but you
also want to be done before the the
worst part of summer right with the
global warming do you factor that in
depends how fast ends up coming the
route might be shorter by the time I get
around to doing it if the coasts come in
though so sometime around this time next
year it should be completed is that the
idea
um maybe yeah my thought is it's
probably got to either be about like you
know a ten month like start point or 18
so I could either do it now or I guess
to be a little less than 18 but by
finishing so I would either maybe try to
do it like this fall or if I don't have
enough in place by then target kind of
the end of winter for 2021 and what
would change what would make you decide
to do it 20:21 versus twenty twenty uh
justjust I mean I'm trying to respect
how much like planning it's going to
take and I haven't really started that
yet so I don't want to like necessarily
get to find out like okay let's say I
just put a date on the on the calendar
right away and then find out oh I need
to like and there's a lot more resources
I have to try to acquire to make this
happen and in this in terms of logistics
like mostly logistics getting everything
just organized enough to because I don't
want to screw it up
so there's that too and then also
planning around my own race schedule to
a degree too so obviously this will
probably this will take the place of an
the way I look at like seasons of racing
is just kind of two key ones you have
like your spring early summer and you're
kind of late summer fall / winter season
so it's kind of - so I'll basically just
sacrifice one of those seasons for this
and I probably won't I mean I don't
really know what to expect I've never
done anything quite like this before but
I'm planning on dedicating one of those
seasons towards that exclusively it's
Jamie's nodding over here he's guys
digging through this article is pretty
interesting so it started here like this
it's walking was a huge spectator sport
and the late 19th century they would bet
money that like you couldn't do it
people followed it like it was the World
Series so it continued on until the
Great Depression World War two probably
because people didn't have enough time
to waste their time doing this and then
it picked back up in the late 20th
century and that's when you had to prove
what you were doing look at this the
first known transcontinental journey
took place in 1896 by a mother-daughter
duo who needing to raise money to save
their farm in Spokane County Washington
responded to a ten thousand dollar
public wager that no one could make it
by foot across the country Helga and
Clara SB left home with $10 between them
as well as a compass a knife a curling
iron and a Smith and Wesson revolver
don't fuck with those ladies they'll
curl your hair and shoot you in the dick
they made it to New York City seven
months later but for reasons unknown did
not receive any reward for their toils
on their way home Helga and Clara took
the train what the fuck why didn't they
get paid someone fuck them out of their
money
probably someone fucked him out of their
money some jackass yet so it started
again picked up back up again in like
the 60s and in 1980 somebody's somebody
I was doing it had his team scramble to
get witness signatures the whole way
across so he could prove that he did it
what he did right yeah yeah I mean
people cheat on marathons right there
yeah jumping cars and marathons and
making on the train there was a guy I
think before Pete broke the record
that I think got caught cheating try
because I mean you got a document stuff
pretty detailed and you know it's crazy
like I mean you'd think it would be
enough just to track it on your watch
and upload it right but like you know
people do goofy things like they get in
the back of the RV I guess and drive
really slow but people who are really
good at like looking at those GPX files
can look and see like oh that's not a
run that's you know they can see these
variances and paces or consistencies
that wouldn't be uniform with running or
something like that
Oh interesting well maybe there should
be some sort of a video recording of it
like for your GoPro in your head I want
to do a live feed just have it possible
satellite yeah it's just probably a way
to do it yeah that would be dope listen
man we're in we'll help you whatever you
do it sounds sounds like a very worthy
cause and it's a crazy
undertaking and we'd be happy to promote
it too and let everybody know and have
people fuckin honk their horn and drive
by as long as they want to like hand off
a nice rib eye or something yeah what
are you gonna eat along the way how are
you gonna do what do you like what kind
of food would you yeah so it kind of uh
maybe go full circle we started before
where we kind of talked about kind of
what I peered eyes with carbohydrates
and stuff like that where I think there
is a point where the distance is long
enough where like a strict ketogenic
diet is maybe more applicable I think
it's very pretty pretty well-established
like if you'd follow a strict ketogenic
diet or a zero carb diet and try to
perform in some of these typical
endurance events it's gonna come at a
performance cost unless you have some
weird like like outlying type situation
and I mean if Trent Stelling worth
looked at he's a guy up in Canada who
works with a lot of the sports
performance stuff and he did some
studies actually looks at like if you do
if you go super strict keto or zero carb
you get really fat adapt you get really
good at burning fat but it comes at a
cost of your ability to burn exogenous
glucose so like if I went zero carb for
like a year and then I tried to take in
my fueling strategy that I do now my
body would probably reject it or at
least I would have to be like like
really really conservative with how much
I used so if you talk to dom D'Agostino
about the stuff not personally though
him yeah
I know I know I follow him and stuff I'm
actually gonna be presenting at his
metabolic health summit in I believe
it's in January early February he's a
very very interesting guy because he's a
super legit fact-based scientist who's
also a power athlete you know and
ketogenic like for a long long time now
try to get him on board for this attempt
but like the what I'm trying to say with
that is like he'd probably help you yeah
yeah I'm give you a great resource for
sure
but like for something like this like my
intensities gonna be so low that like I
don't technically need to be taking in
exogenous glucose for something like
that so it might actually be move me to
be as fat adapted as I can get versus
what I'm normally doing is I'm trying to
get as fat adapt it is I need to be but
not necessarily so far that it comes at
the compromise of being able to do my in
race nutrition fueling play I was always
under the impression that your body
always knows what to do with glucose but
that it has to be fat adapted that's
yeah I say I I think you probably can to
a degree but what happens is like you
you down regulates like I can't speak to
the science perfectly but Trent's
telling worth did a bunch of research
where it basically it down regulates the
mechanism that allows you to take in
glucose and utilize it in a meaningful
way so like you know most people can
tolerate probably somewhere between
maybe mmm 60 to 90 grams of glucose per
hour during some of these events whereas
like if you went on a strict zero carb
diet and tried to do 6 to 90 grams of a
sports drink or fuel or something like
that like I don't think your body could
clear it because it would have down
regulated the your body's capability to
do that so many folks who are interested
should look at trance telling what's
work
he he would be able to describe it in
much better detail than I can oh you
would just go on a real super heavy fat
I think so that's where I'm that's what
I'm thinking about I wouldn't
necessarily Otto's coconut oil
yeah meat yeah there's main line those
f-bombs yeah i think a lot of fat and a
lot of protein would be the name the
game for something that that's that low
and that or that slow intensity and you
would try for how many miles a day well
Pete did it in 70 so I feel like it
would be cool to try to challenge his
his his attempt but uh
how many hours was he doing a day I
don't know that's a good question I'd
have to look back and see what he was
doing if it don't know if it was
consistent leave the same every day so
maybe that's where my plan would deviate
and I'm probably gonna learn along the
way and maybe change things but I do
kind of like at least on paper that idea
of targeting a 12 to 14 hour window so
that I have at least 10 hours to kind of
like refuel and sleep and stay on top of
that stuff and what if that'll likely
mean is like maybe there'll be some days
where I go well past 70 miles maybe
it'll be some days where I go well under
and you just hope that the your average
to get the record but the records kind
of secondary I'm gonna stick if I fall
off if it's clear when I get to the
Midwest that I'm not gonna hit Pete
please record we're gonna just try to
you know keep the main goal in mind of
bringing awareness to fight for the
Forgotten beautiful well listen we're in
you let us know we'll help you we'll
pump it up will sponsor you whatever we
need to do let's make it happen
awesome and thank you thanks Zach saying
thanks for being here yeah people in
mind if I share my social media real
quickly I can ask you that oh cool I
didn't interrupt you but yeah I mean you
can find me on my website and Zach
better does the ACH BI tter com social
medias Instagram at Zach better and
Twitter at Z bitter all that stuff can
be found on my website so Zach better
ladies and gentlemen thanks brother
appreciate it man thank you bye
[Music]